(Found Among the Papers of the Late
Francis Wayland Thurston, of Boston)
“Of such great powers or beings there may be conceivably a survival . . . a survival of a hugely remote period when . . . consciousness was manifested, perhaps, in shapes and forms long since withdrawn before the tide of advancing humanity . . . forms of which poetry and legend alone have caught a flying memory and called them gods, monsters, mythical beings of all sorts and kinds. . . .”
—Algernon Blackwood.

I.
The Horror in Clay.

The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents. We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far. The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the deadly light into the peace and safety of a new dark age.
     Theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cycle wherein our world and human race form transient incidents. They have hinted at strange survivals in terms which would freeze the blood if not masked by a bland optimism. But it is not from them that there came the single glimpse of forbidden aeons which chills me when I think of it and maddens me when I dream of it. That glimpse, like all dread glimpses of truth, flashed out from an accidental piecing together of separated things—in this case an old newspaper item and the notes of a dead professor. I hope that no one else will accomplish this piecing out; certainly, if I live, I shall never knowingly supply a link in so hideous a chain. I think that the professor, too, intended to keep silent regarding the part he knew, and that he would have destroyed his notes had not sudden death seized him.
     My knowledge of the thing began in the winter of 1926–27 with the death of my grand-uncle George Gammell Angell, Professor Emeritus of Semitic Languages in Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island. Professor Angell was widely known as an authority on ancient inscriptions, and had frequently been resorted to by the heads of prominent museums; so that his passing at the age of ninety-two may be recalled by many. Locally, interest was intensified by the obscurity of the cause of death. The professor had been stricken whilst returning from the Newport boat; falling suddenly, as witnesses said, after having been jostled by a nautical-looking negro who had come from one of the queer dark courts on the precipitous hillside which formed a short cut from the waterfront to the deceased’s home in Williams Street. Physicians were unable to find any visible disorder, but concluded after perplexed debate that some obscure lesion of the heart, induced by the brisk ascent of so steep a hill by so elderly a man, was responsible for the end. At the time I saw no reason to dissent from this dictum, but latterly I am inclined to wonder—and more than wonder.
     As my grand-uncle’s heir and executor, for he died a childless widower, I was expected to go over his papers with some thoroughness; and for that purpose moved his entire set of files and boxes to my quarters in Boston. Much of the material which I correlated will be later published by the American Archaeological Society, but there was one box which I found exceedingly puzzling, and which I felt much averse from shewing to other eyes. It had been locked, and I did not find the key till it occurred to me to examine the personal ring which the professor carried always in his pocket. Then indeed I succeeded in opening it, but when I did so seemed only to be confronted by a greater and more closely locked barrier. For what could be the meaning of the queer clay bas-relief and the disjointed jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which I found? Had my uncle, in his latter years, become credulous of the most superficial impostures? I resolved to search out the eccentric sculptor responsible for this apparent disturbance of an old man’s peace of mind.
     The bas-relief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick and about five by six inches in area; obviously of modern origin. Its designs, however, were far from modern in atmosphere and suggestion; for although the vagaries of cubism and futurism are many and wild, they do not often reproduce that cryptic regularity which lurks in prehistoric writing. And writing of some kind the bulk of these designs seemed certainly to be; though my memory, despite much familiarity with the papers and collections of my uncle, failed in any way to identify this particular species, or even to hint at its remotest affiliations.
     Above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evidently pictorial intent, though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear idea of its nature. It seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representing a monster, of a form which only a diseased fancy could conceive. If I say that my somewhat extravagant imagination yielded simultaneous pictures of an octopus, a dragon, and a human caricature, I shall not be unfaithful to the spirit of the thing. A pulpy, tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary wings; but it was the general outline of the whole which made it most shockingly frightful. Behind the figure was a vague suggestion of a Cyclopean architectural background.
     The writing accompanying this oddity was, aside from a stack of press cuttings, in Professor Angell’s most recent hand; and made no pretence to literary style. What seemed to be the main document was headed “CTHULHU CULT” in characters painstakingly printed to avoid the erroneous reading of a word so unheard-of. The manuscript was divided into two sections, the first of which was headed “1925—Dream and Dream Work of H. A. Wilcox, 7 Thomas St., Providence, R.I.”, and the second, “Narrative of Inspector John R. Legrasse, 121 Bienville St., New Orleans, La., at 1908 A. A. S. Mtg.—Notes on Same, & Prof. Webb’s Acct.” The other manuscript papers were all brief notes, some of them accounts of the queer dreams of different persons, some of them citations from theosophical books and magazines (notably W. Scott-Elliot’s Atlantis and the Lost Lemuria), and the rest comments on long-surviving secret societies and hidden cults, with references to passages in such mythological and anthropological source-books as Frazer’s Golden Bough and Miss Murray’s Witch-Cult in Western Europe. The cuttings largely alluded to outré mental illnesses and outbreaks of group folly or mania in the spring of 1925.
     The first half of the principal manuscript told a very peculiar tale. It appears that on March 1st, 1925, a thin, dark young man of neurotic and excited aspect had called upon Professor Angell bearing the singular clay bas-relief, which was then exceedingly damp and fresh. His card bore the name of Henry Anthony Wilcox, and my uncle had recognised him as the youngest son of an excellent family slightly known to him, who had latterly been studying sculpture at the Rhode Island School of Design and living alone at the Fleur-de-Lys Building near that institution. Wilcox was a precocious youth of known genius but great eccentricity, and had from childhood excited attention through the strange stories and odd dreams he was in the habit of relating. He called himself “psychically hypersensitive”, but the staid folk of the ancient commercial city dismissed him as merely “queer”. Never mingling much with his kind, he had dropped gradually from social visibility, and was now known only to a small group of aesthetes from other towns. Even the Providence Art Club, anxious to preserve its conservatism, had found him quite hopeless.
     On the occasion of the visit, ran the professor’s manuscript, the sculptor abruptly asked for the benefit of his host’s archaeological knowledge in identifying the hieroglyphics on the bas-relief. He spoke in a dreamy, stilted manner which suggested pose and alienated sympathy; and my uncle shewed some sharpness in replying, for the conspicuous freshness of the tablet implied kinship with anything but archaeology. Young Wilcox’s rejoinder, which impressed my uncle enough to make him recall and record it verbatim, was of a fantastically poetic cast which must have typified his whole conversation, and which I have since found highly characteristic of him. He said, “It is new, indeed, for I made it last night in a dream of strange cities; and dreams are older than brooding Tyre, or the contemplative Sphinx, or garden-girdled Babylon.”
     It was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played upon a sleeping memory and won the fevered interest of my uncle. There had been a slight earthquake tremor the night before, the most considerable felt in New England for some years; and Wilcox’s imagination had been keenly affected. Upon retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream of great Cyclopean cities of titan blocks and sky-flung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister with latent horror. Hieroglyphics had covered the walls and pillars, and from some undetermined point below had come a voice that was not a voice; a chaotic sensation which only fancy could transmute into sound, but which he attempted to render by the almost unpronounceable jumble of letters, “Cthulhu fhtagn”.
     This verbal jumble was the key to the recollection which excited and disturbed Professor Angell. He questioned the sculptor with scientific minuteness; and studied with almost frantic intensity the bas-relief on which the youth had found himself working, chilled and clad only in his night-clothes, when waking had stolen bewilderingly over him. My uncle blamed his old age, Wilcox afterward said, for his slowness in recognising both hieroglyphics and pictorial design. Many of his questions seemed highly out-of-place to his visitor, especially those which tried to connect the latter with strange cults or societies; and Wilcox could not understand the repeated promises of silence which he was offered in exchange for an admission of membership in some widespread mystical or paganly religious body. When Professor Angell became convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant of any cult or system of cryptic lore, he besieged his visitor with demands for future reports of dreams. This bore regular fruit, for after the first interview the manuscript records daily calls of the young man, during which he related startling fragments of nocturnal imagery whose burden was always some terrible Cyclopean vista of dark and dripping stone, with a subterrene voice or intelligence shouting monotonously in enigmatical sense-impacts uninscribable save as gibberish. The two sounds most frequently repeated are those rendered by the letters “Cthulhu” and “R’lyeh”.
     On March 23d, the manuscript continued, Wilcox failed to appear; and inquiries at his quarters revealed that he had been stricken with an obscure sort of fever and taken to the home of his family in Waterman Street. He had cried out in the night, arousing several other artists in the building, and had manifested since then only alternations of unconsciousness and delirium. My uncle at once telephoned the family, and from that time forward kept close watch of the case; calling often at the Thayer Street office of Dr. Tobey, whom he learned to be in charge. The youth’s febrile mind, apparently, was dwelling on strange things; and the doctor shuddered now and then as he spoke of them. They included not only a repetition of what he had formerly dreamed, but touched wildly on a gigantic thing “miles high” which walked or lumbered about. He at no time fully described this object, but occasional frantic words, as repeated by Dr. Tobey, convinced the professor that it must be identical with the nameless monstrosity he had sought to depict in his dream-sculpture. Reference to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the young man’s subsidence into lethargy. His temperature, oddly enough, was not greatly above normal; but his whole condition was otherwise such as to suggest true fever rather than mental disorder.
     On April 2nd at about 3 p.m. every trace of Wilcox’s malady suddenly ceased. He sat upright in bed, astonished to find himself at home and completely ignorant of what had happened in dream or reality since the night of March 22nd. Pronounced well by his physician, he returned to his quarters in three days; but to Professor Angell he was of no further assistance. All traces of strange dreaming had vanished with his recovery, and my uncle kept no record of his night-thoughts after a week of pointless and irrelevant accounts of thoroughly usual visions.
     Here the first part of the manuscript ended, but references to certain of the scattered notes gave me much material for thought—so much, in fact, that only the ingrained scepticism then forming my philosophy can account for my continued distrust of the artist. The notes in question were those descriptive of the dreams of various persons covering the same period as that in which young Wilcox had had his strange visitations. My uncle, it seems, had quickly instituted a prodigiously far-flung body of inquiries amongst nearly all the friends whom he could question without impertinence, asking for nightly reports of their dreams, and the dates of any notable visions for some time past. The reception of his request seems to have been varied; but he must, at the very least, have received more responses than any ordinary man could have handled without a secretary. This original correspondence was not preserved, but his notes formed a thorough and really significant digest. Average people in society and business—New England’s traditional “salt of the earth”—gave an almost completely negative result, though scattered cases of uneasy but formless nocturnal impressions appear here and there, always between March 23d and April 2nd—the period of young Wilcox’s delirium. Scientific men were little more affected, though four cases of vague description suggest fugitive glimpses of strange landscapes, and in one case there is mentioned a dread of something abnormal.
     It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came, and I know that panic would have broken loose had they been able to compare notes. As it was, lacking their original letters, I half suspected the compiler of having asked leading questions, or of having edited the correspondence in corroboration of what he had latently resolved to see. That is why I continued to feel that Wilcox, somehow cognisant of the old data which my uncle had possessed, had been imposing on the veteran scientist. These responses from aesthetes told a disturbing tale. From February 28th to April 2nd a large proportion of them had dreamed very bizarre things, the intensity of the dreams being immeasurably the stronger during the period of the sculptor’s delirium. Over a fourth of those who reported anything, reported scenes and half-sounds not unlike those which Wilcox had described; and some of the dreamers confessed acute fear of the gigantic nameless thing visible toward the last. One case, which the note describes with emphasis, was very sad. The subject, a widely known architect with leanings toward theosophy and occultism, went violently insane on the date of young Wilcox’s seizure, and expired several months later after incessant screamings to be saved from some escaped denizen of hell. Had my uncle referred to these cases by name instead of merely by number, I should have attempted some corroboration and personal investigation; but as it was, I succeeded in tracing down only a few. All of these, however, bore out the notes in full. I have often wondered if all the objects of the professor’s questioning felt as puzzled as did this fraction. It is well that no explanation shall ever reach them.
     The press cuttings, as I have intimated, touched on cases of panic, mania, and eccentricity during the given period. Professor Angell must have employed a cutting bureau, for the number of extracts was tremendous and the sources scattered throughout the globe. Here was a nocturnal suicide in London, where a lone sleeper had leaped from a window after a shocking cry. Here likewise a rambling letter to the editor of a paper in South America, where a fanatic deduces a dire future from visions he has seen. A despatch from California describes a theosophist colony as donning white robes en masse for some “glorious fulfilment” which never arrives, whilst items from India speak guardedly of serious native unrest toward the end of March. Voodoo orgies multiply in Hayti, and African outposts report ominous mutterings. American officers in the Philippines find certain tribes bothersome about this time, and New York policemen are mobbed by hysterical Levantines on the night of March 22–23. The west of Ireland, too, is full of wild rumour and legendry, and a fantastic painter named Ardois-Bonnot hangs a blasphemous “Dream Landscape” in the Paris spring salon of 1926. And so numerous are the recorded troubles in insane asylums, that only a miracle can have stopped the medical fraternity from noting strange parallelisms and drawing mystified conclusions. A weird bunch of cuttings, all told; and I can at this date scarcely envisage the callous rationalism with which I set them aside. But I was then convinced that young Wilcox had known of the older matters mentioned by the professor.

II.
The Tale of Inspector Legrasse.

The older matters which had made the sculptor’s dream and bas-relief so significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half of his long manuscript. Once before, it appears, Professor Angell had seen the hellish outlines of the nameless monstrosity, puzzled over the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the ominous syllables which can be rendered only as “Cthulhu”; and all this in so stirring and horrible a connexion that it is small wonder he pursued young Wilcox with queries and demands for data.
     The earlier experience had come in 1908, seventeen years before, when the American Archaeological Society held its annual meeting in St. Louis. Professor Angell, as befitted one of his authority and attainments, had had a prominent part in all the deliberations; and was one of the first to be approached by the several outsiders who took advantage of the convocation to offer questions for correct answering and problems for expert solution.
     The chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the entire meeting, was a commonplace-looking middle-aged man who had travelled all the way from New Orleans for certain special information unobtainable from any local source. His name was John Raymond Legrasse, and he was by profession an Inspector of Police. With him he bore the subject of his visit, a grotesque, repulsive, and apparently very ancient stone statuette whose origin he was at a loss to determine. It must not be fancied that Inspector Legrasse had the least interest in archaeology. On the contrary, his wish for enlightenment was prompted by purely professional considerations. The statuette, idol, fetish, or whatever it was, had been captured some months before in the wooded swamps south of New Orleans during a raid on a supposed voodoo meeting; and so singular and hideous were the rites connected with it, that the police could not but realise that they had stumbled on a dark cult totally unknown to them, and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of the African voodoo circles. Of its origin, apart from the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted from the captured members, absolutely nothing was to be discovered; hence the anxiety of the police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to place the frightful symbol, and through it track down the cult to its fountain-head.
     Inspector Legrasse was scarcely prepared for the sensation which his offering created. One sight of the thing had been enough to throw the assembled men of science into a state of tense excitement, and they lost no time in crowding around him to gaze at the diminutive figure whose utter strangeness and air of genuinely abysmal antiquity hinted so potently at unopened and archaic vistas. No recognised school of sculpture had animated this terrible object, yet centuries and even thousands of years seemed recorded in its dim and greenish surface of unplaceable stone.
     The figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for close and careful study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and of exquisitely artistic workmanship. It represented a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopus-like head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind. This thing, which seemed instinct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy, was of a somewhat bloated corpulence, and squatted evilly on a rectangular block or pedestal covered with undecipherable characters. The tips of the wings touched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the centre, whilst the long, curved claws of the doubled-up, crouching hind legs gripped the front edge and extended a quarter of the way down toward the bottom of the pedestal. The cephalopod head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial feelers brushed the backs of huge fore paws which clasped the croucher’s elevated knees. The aspect of the whole was abnormally life-like, and the more subtly fearful because its source was so totally unknown. Its vast, awesome, and incalculable age was unmistakable; yet not one link did it shew with any known type of art belonging to civilisation’s youth—or indeed to any other time. Totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery; for the soapy, greenish-black stone with its golden or iridescent flecks and striations resembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy. The characters along the base were equally baffling; and no member present, despite a representation of half the world’s expert learning in this field, could form the least notion of even their remotest linguistic kinship. They, like the subject and material, belonged to something horribly remote and distinct from mankind as we know it; something frightfully suggestive of old and unhallowed cycles of life in which our world and our conceptions have no part.
     And yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confessed defeat at the Inspector’s problem, there was one man in that gathering who suspected a touch of bizarre familiarity in the monstrous shape and writing, and who presently told with some diffidence of the odd trifle he knew. This person was the late William Channing Webb, Professor of Anthropology in Princeton University, and an explorer of no slight note. Professor Webb had been engaged, forty-eight years before, in a tour of Greenland and Iceland in search of some Runic inscriptions which he failed to unearth; and whilst high up on the West Greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or cult of degenerate Esquimaux whose religion, a curious form of devil-worship, chilled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness. It was a faith of which other Esquimaux knew little, and which they mentioned only with shudders, saying that it had come down from horribly ancient aeons before ever the world was made. Besides nameless rites and human sacrifices there were certain queer hereditary rituals addressed to a supreme elder devil or tornasuk; and of this Professor Webb had taken a careful phonetic copy from an aged angekok or wizard-priest, expressing the sounds in Roman letters as best he knew how. But just now of prime significance was the fetish which this cult had cherished, and around which they danced when the aurora leaped high over the ice cliffs. It was, the professor stated, a very crude bas-relief of stone, comprising a hideous picture and some cryptic writing. And so far as he could tell, it was a rough parallel in all essential features of the bestial thing now lying before the meeting.
     This data, received with suspense and astonishment by the assembled members, proved doubly exciting to Inspector Legrasse; and he began at once to ply his informant with questions. Having noted and copied an oral ritual among the swamp cult-worshippers his men had arrested, he besought the professor to remember as best he might the syllables taken down amongst the diabolist Esquimaux. There then followed an exhaustive comparison of details, and a moment of really awed silence when both detective and scientist agreed on the virtual identity of the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many worlds of distance apart. What, in substance, both the Esquimau wizards and the Louisiana swamp-priests had chanted to their kindred idols was something very like this—the word-divisions being guessed at from traditional breaks in the phrase as chanted aloud:
     “Ph’nglui mglw’nafh Cthulhu R’lyeh wgah’nagl fhtagn.”
     Legrasse had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several among his mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them the words meant. This text, as given, ran something like this:
     “In his house at R’lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.”
     And now, in response to a general and urgent demand, Inspector Legrasse related as fully as possible his experience with the swamp worshippers; telling a story to which I could see my uncle attached profound significance. It savoured of the wildest dreams of myth-maker and theosophist, and disclosed an astonishing degree of cosmic imagination among such half-castes and pariahs as might be least expected to possess it.
     On November 1st, 1907, there had come to the New Orleans police a frantic summons from the swamp and lagoon country to the south. The squatters there, mostly primitive but good-natured descendants of Lafitte’s men, were in the grip of stark terror from an unknown thing which had stolen upon them in the night. It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a more terrible sort than they had ever known; and some of their women and children had disappeared since the malevolent tom-tom had begun its incessant beating far within the black haunted woods where no dweller ventured. There were insane shouts and harrowing screams, soul-chilling chants and dancing devil-flames; and, the frightened messenger added, the people could stand it no more.
     So a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an automobile, had set out in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as a guide. At the end of the passable road they alighted, and for miles splashed on in silence through the terrible cypress woods where day never came. Ugly roots and malignant hanging nooses of Spanish moss beset them, and now and then a pile of dank stones or fragment of a rotting wall intensified by its hint of morbid habitation a depression which every malformed tree and every fungous islet combined to create. At length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts, hove in sight; and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the group of bobbing lanterns. The muffled beat of tom-toms was now faintly audible far, far ahead; and a curdling shriek came at infrequent intervals when the wind shifted. A reddish glare, too, seemed to filter through the pale undergrowth beyond endless avenues of forest night. Reluctant even to be left alone again, each one of the cowed squatters refused point-blank to advance another inch toward the scene of unholy worship, so Inspector Legrasse and his nineteen colleagues plunged on unguided into black arcades of horror that none of them had ever trod before.
     The region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evil repute, substantially unknown and untraversed by white men. There were legends of a hidden lake unglimpsed by mortal sight, in which dwelt a huge, formless white polypous thing with luminous eyes; and squatters whispered that bat-winged devils flew up out of caverns in inner earth to worship it at midnight. They said it had been there before D’Iberville, before La Salle, before the Indians, and before even the wholesome beasts and birds of the woods. It was nightmare itself, and to see it was to die. But it made men dream, and so they knew enough to keep away. The present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringe of this abhorred area, but that location was bad enough; hence perhaps the very place of the worship had terrified the squatters more than the shocking sounds and incidents.
     Only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard by Legrasse’s men as they ploughed on through the black morass toward the red glare and the muffled tom-toms. There are vocal qualities peculiar to men, and vocal qualities peculiar to beasts; and it is terrible to hear the one when the source should yield the other. Animal fury and orgiastic licence here whipped themselves to daemoniac heights by howls and squawking ecstasies that tore and reverberated through those nighted woods like pestilential tempests from the gulfs of hell. Now and then the less organised ululation would cease, and from what seemed a well-drilled chorus of hoarse voices would rise in sing-song chant that hideous phrase or ritual:
     “Ph’nglui mglw’nafh Cthulhu R’lyeh wgah’nagl fhtagn.”
Then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner, came suddenly in sight of the spectacle itself. Four of them reeled, one fainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which the mad cacophony of the orgy fortunately deadened. Legrasse dashed swamp water on the face of the fainting man, and all stood trembling and nearly hypnotised with horror.
     In a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of perhaps an acre’s extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. On this now leaped and twisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality than any but a Sime or an Angarola could paint. Void of clothing, this hybrid spawn were braying, bellowing, and writhing about a monstrous ring-shaped bonfire; in the centre of which, revealed by occasional rifts in the curtain of flame, stood a great granite monolith some eight feet in height; on top of which, incongruous with its diminutiveness, rested the noxious carven statuette. From a wide circle of ten scaffolds set up at regular intervals with the flame-girt monolith as a centre hung, head downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squatters who had disappeared. It was inside this circle that the ring of worshippers jumped and roared, the general direction of the mass motion being from left to right in endless Bacchanal between the ring of bodies and the ring of fire.
     It may have been only imagination and it may have been only echoes which induced one of the men, an excitable Spaniard, to fancy he heard antiphonal responses to the ritual from some far and unillumined spot deeper within the wood of ancient legendry and horror. This man, Joseph D. Galvez, I later met and questioned; and he proved distractingly imaginative. He indeed went so far as to hint of the faint beating of great wings, and of a glimpse of shining eyes and a mountainous white bulk beyond the remotest trees—but I suppose he had been hearing too much native superstition.
     Actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively brief duration. Duty came first; and although there must have been nearly a hundred mongrel celebrants in the throng, the police relied on their firearms and plunged determinedly into the nauseous rout. For five minutes the resultant din and chaos were beyond description. Wild blows were struck, shots were fired, and escapes were made; but in the end Legrasse was able to count some forty-seven sullen prisoners, whom he forced to dress in haste and fall into line between two rows of policemen. Five of the worshippers lay dead, and two severely wounded ones were carried away on improvised stretchers by their fellow-prisoners. The image on the monolith, of course, was carefully removed and carried back by Legrasse.
     Examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixed-blooded, and mentally aberrant type. Most were seamen, and a sprinkling of negroes and mulattoes, largely West Indians or Brava Portuguese from the Cape Verde Islands, gave a colouring of voodooism to the heterogeneous cult. But before many questions were asked, it became manifest that something far deeper and older than negro fetichism was involved. Degraded and ignorant as they were, the creatures held with surprising consistency to the central idea of their loathsome faith.
     They worshipped, so they said, the Great Old Ones who lived ages before there were any men, and who came to the young world out of the sky. Those Old Ones were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea; but their dead bodies had told their secrets in dreams to the first men, who formed a cult which had never died. This was that cult, and the prisoners said it had always existed and always would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the world until the time when the great priest Cthulhu, from his dark house in the mighty city of R’lyeh under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again beneath his sway. Some day he would call, when the stars were ready, and the secret cult would always be waiting to liberate him.
     Meanwhile no more must be told. There was a secret which even torture could not extract. Mankind was not absolutely alone among the conscious things of earth, for shapes came out of the dark to visit the faithful few. But these were not the Great Old Ones. No man had ever seen the Old Ones. The carven idol was great Cthulhu, but none might say whether or not the others were precisely like him. No one could read the old writing now, but things were told by word of mouth. The chanted ritual was not the secret—that was never spoken aloud, only whispered. The chant meant only this: “In his house at R’lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.”
     Only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be hanged, and the rest were committed to various institutions. All denied a part in the ritual murders, and averred that the killing had been done by Black Winged Ones which had come to them from their immemorial meeting-place in the haunted wood. But of those mysterious allies no coherent account could ever be gained. What the police did extract, came mainly from an immensely aged mestizo named Castro, who claimed to have sailed to strange ports and talked with undying leaders of the cult in the mountains of China.
     Old Castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the speculations of theosophists and made man and the world seem recent and transient indeed. There had been aeons when other Things ruled on the earth, and They had had great cities. Remains of Them, he said the deathless Chinamen had told him, were still to be found as Cyclopean stones on islands in the Pacific. They all died vast epochs of time before men came, but there were arts which could revive Them when the stars had come round again to the right positions in the cycle of eternity. They had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and brought Their images with Them.
     These Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed altogether of flesh and blood. They had shape—for did not this star-fashioned image prove it?—but that shape was not made of matter. When the stars were right, They could plunge from world to world through the sky; but when the stars were wrong, They could not live. But although They no longer lived, They would never really die. They all lay in stone houses in Their great city of R’lyeh, preserved by the spells of mighty Cthulhu for a glorious resurrection when the stars and the earth might once more be ready for Them. But at that time some force from outside must serve to liberate Their bodies. The spells that preserved Them intact likewise prevented Them from making an initial move, and They could only lie awake in the dark and think whilst uncounted millions of years rolled by. They knew all that was occurring in the universe, but Their mode of speech was transmitted thought. Even now They talked in Their tombs. When, after infinities of chaos, the first men came, the Great Old Ones spoke to the sensitive among them by moulding their dreams; for only thus could Their language reach the fleshly minds of mammals.
     Then, whispered Castro, those first men formed the cult around small idols which the Great Ones shewed them; idols brought in dim aeras from dark stars. That cult would never die till the stars came right again, and the secret priests would take great Cthulhu from His tomb to revive His subjects and resume His rule of earth. The time would be easy to know, for then mankind would have become as the Great Old Ones; free and wild and beyond good and evil, with laws and morals thrown aside and all men shouting and killing and revelling in joy. Then the liberated Old Ones would teach them new ways to shout and kill and revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame with a holocaust of ecstasy and freedom. Meanwhile the cult, by appropriate rites, must keep alive the memory of those ancient ways and shadow forth the prophecy of their return.
     In the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed Old Ones in dreams, but then something had happened. The great stone city R’lyeh, with its monoliths and sepulchres, had sunk beneath the waves; and the deep waters, full of the one primal mystery through which not even thought can pass, had cut off the spectral intercourse. But memory never died, and high-priests said that the city would rise again when the stars were right. Then came out of the earth the black spirits of earth, mouldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumours picked up in caverns beneath forgotten sea-bottoms. But of them old Castro dared not speak much. He cut himself off hurriedly, and no amount of persuasion or subtlety could elicit more in this direction. The size of the Old Ones, too, he curiously declined to mention. Of the cult, he said that he thought the centre lay amid the pathless deserts of Arabia, where Irem, the City of Pillars, dreams hidden and untouched. It was not allied to the European witch-cult, and was virtually unknown beyond its members. No book had ever really hinted of it, though the deathless Chinamen said that there were double meanings in the Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred which the initiated might read as they chose, especially the much-discussed couplet:
 
“That is not dead which can eternal lie,
And with strange aeons even death may die.”

     Legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had inquired in vain concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. Castro, apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was wholly secret. The authorities at Tulane University could shed no light upon either cult or image, and now the detective had come to the highest authorities in the country and met with no more than the Greenland tale of Professor Webb.
     The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse’s tale, corroborated as it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequent correspondence of those who attended; although scant mention occurs in the formal publications of the society. Caution is the first care of those accustomed to face occasional charlatanry and imposture. Legrasse for some time lent the image to Professor Webb, but at the latter’s death it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where I viewed it not long ago. It is truly a terrible thing, and unmistakably akin to the dream-sculpture of young Wilcox.
     That my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor I did not wonder, for what thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what Legrasse had learned of the cult, of a sensitive young man who had dreamed not only the figure and exact hieroglyphics of the swamp-found image and the Greenland devil tablet, but had come in his dreams upon at least three of the precise words of the formula uttered alike by Esquimau diabolists and mongrel Louisianans? Professor Angell’s instant start on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness was eminently natural; though privately I suspected young Wilcox of having heard of the cult in some indirect way, and of having invented a series of dreams to heighten and continue the mystery at my uncle’s expense. The dream-narratives and cuttings collected by the professor were, of course, strong corroboration; but the rationalism of my mind and the extravagance of the whole subject led me to adopt what I thought the most sensible conclusions. So, after thoroughly studying the manuscript again and correlating the theosophical and anthropological notes with the cult narrative of Legrasse, I made a trip to Providence to see the sculptor and give him the rebuke I thought proper for so boldly imposing upon a learned and aged man.
     Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur-de-Lys Building in Thomas Street, a hideous Victorian imitation of seventeenth-century Breton architecture which flaunts its stuccoed front amidst the lovely colonial houses on the ancient hill, and under the very shadow of the finest Georgian steeple in America. I found him at work in his rooms, and at once conceded from the specimens scattered about that his genius is indeed profound and authentic. He will, I believe, some time be heard from as one of the great decadents; for he has crystallised in clay and will one day mirror in marble those nightmares and phantasies which Arthur Machen evokes in prose, and Clark Ashton Smith makes visible in verse and in painting.
     Dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he turned languidly at my knock and asked me my business without rising. When I told him who I was, he displayed some interest; for my uncle had excited his curiosity in probing his strange dreams, yet had never explained the reason for the study. I did not enlarge his knowledge in this regard, but sought with some subtlety to draw him out. In a short time I became convinced of his absolute sincerity, for he spoke of the dreams in a manner none could mistake. They and their subconscious residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and he shewed me a morbid statue whose contours almost made me shake with the potency of its black suggestion. He could not recall having seen the original of this thing except in his own dream bas-relief, but the outlines had formed themselves insensibly under his hands. It was, no doubt, the giant shape he had raved of in delirium. That he really knew nothing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncle’s relentless catechism had let fall, he soon made clear; and again I strove to think of some way in which he could possibly have received the weird impressions.
     He talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion; making me see with terrible vividness the damp Cyclopean city of slimy green stone—whose geometry, he oddly said, was all wrong—and hear with frightened expectancy the ceaseless, half-mental calling from underground: “Cthulhu fhtagn”, “Cthulhu fhtagn”. These words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of dead Cthulhu’s dream-vigil in his stone vault at R’lyeh, and I felt deeply moved despite my rational beliefs. Wilcox, I was sure, had heard of the cult in some casual way, and had soon forgotten it amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining. Later, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious expression in dreams, in the bas-relief, and in the terrible statue I now beheld; so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent one. The youth was of a type, at once slightly affected and slightly ill-mannered, which I could never like; but I was willing enough now to admit both his genius and his honesty. I took leave of him amicably, and wish him all the success his talent promises.
     The matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at times I had visions of personal fame from researches into its origin and connexions. I visited New Orleans, talked with Legrasse and others of that old-time raiding-party, saw the frightful image, and even questioned such of the mongrel prisoners as still survived. Old Castro, unfortunately, had been dead for some years. What I now heard so graphically at first-hand, though it was really no more than a detailed confirmation of what my uncle had written, excited me afresh; for I felt sure that I was on the track of a very real, very secret, and very ancient religion whose discovery would make me an anthropologist of note. My attitude was still one of absolute materialism, as I wish it still were, and I discounted with almost inexplicable perversity the coincidence of the dream notes and odd cuttings collected by Professor Angell.
     One thing I began to suspect, and which I now fear I know, is that my uncle’s death was far from natural. He fell on a narrow hill street leading up from an ancient waterfront swarming with foreign mongrels, after a careless push from a negro sailor. I did not forget the mixed blood and marine pursuits of the cult-members in Louisiana, and would not be surprised to learn of secret methods and poison needles as ruthless and as anciently known as the cryptic rites and beliefs. Legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone; but in Norway a certain seaman who saw things is dead. Might not the deeper inquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptor’s data have come to sinister ears? I think Professor Angell died because he knew too much, or because he was likely to learn too much. Whether I shall go as he did remains to be seen, for I have learned much now.

III.
The Madness from the Sea.

If heaven ever wishes to grant me a boon, it will be a total effacing of the results of a mere chance which fixed my eye on a certain stray piece of shelf-paper. It was nothing on which I would naturally have stumbled in the course of my daily round, for it was an old number of an Australian journal, the Sydney Bulletin for April 18, 1925. It had escaped even the cutting bureau which had at the time of its issuance been avidly collecting material for my uncle’s research.
     I had largely given over my inquiries into what Professor Angell called the “Cthulhu Cult”, and was visiting a learned friend in Paterson, New Jersey; the curator of a local museum and a mineralogist of note. Examining one day the reserve specimens roughly set on the storage shelves in a rear room of the museum, my eye was caught by an odd picture in one of the old papers spread beneath the stones. It was the Sydney Bulletin I have mentioned, for my friend has wide affiliations in all conceivable foreign parts; and the picture was a half-tone cut of a hideous stone image almost identical with that which Legrasse had found in the swamp.
     Eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, I scanned the item in detail; and was disappointed to find it of only moderate length. What it suggested, however, was of portentous significance to my flagging quest; and I carefully tore it out for immediate action. It read as follows:
MYSTERY DERELICT FOUND AT SEA
Vigilant Arrives With Helpless Armed New Zealand Yacht in Tow.
One Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard. Tale of
Desperate Battle and Deaths at Sea.
Rescued Seaman Refuses
Particulars of Strange Experience.
Odd Idol Found in His Possession. Inquiry
to Follow.

The Morrison Co.’s freighter Vigilant, bound from Valparaiso, arrived this morning at its wharf in Darling Harbour, having in tow the battled and disabled but heavily armed steam yacht Alert of Dunedin, N. Z., which was sighted April 12th in S. Latitude 34° 21′, W. Longitude 152° 17′ with one living and one dead man aboard.
     The Vigilant left Valparaiso March 25th, and on April 2nd was driven considerably south of her course by exceptionally heavy storms and monster waves. On April 12th the derelict was sighted; and though apparently deserted, was found upon boarding to contain one survivor in a half-delirious condition and one man who had evidently been dead for more than a week. The living man was clutching a horrible stone idol of unknown origin, about a foot in height, regarding whose nature authorities at Sydney University, the Royal Society, and the Museum in College Street all profess complete bafflement, and which the survivor says he found in the cabin of the yacht, in a small carved shrine of common pattern.
     This man, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly strange story of piracy and slaughter. He is Gustaf Johansen, a Norwegian of some intelligence, and had been second mate of the two-masted schooner Emma of Auckland, which sailed for Callao February 20th with a complement of eleven men. The Emma, he says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her course by the great storm of March 1st, and on March 22nd, in S. Latitude 49° 51′, W. Longitude 128° 34′, encountered the Alert, manned by a queer and evil-looking crew of Kanakas and half-castes. Being ordered peremptorily to turn back, Capt. Collins refused; whereupon the strange crew began to fire savagely and without warning upon the schooner with a peculiarly heavy battery of brass cannon forming part of the yacht’s equipment. The Emma’s men shewed fight, says the survivor, and though the schooner began to sink from shots beneath the waterline they managed to heave alongside their enemy and board her, grappling with the savage crew on the yacht’s deck, and being forced to kill them all, the number being slightly superior, because of their particularly abhorrent and desperate though rather clumsy mode of fighting.
     Three of the Emma’s men, including Capt. Collins and First Mate Green, were killed; and the remaining eight under Second Mate Johansen proceeded to navigate the captured yacht, going ahead in their original direction to see if any reason for their ordering back had existed. The next day, it appears, they raised and landed on a small island, although none is known to exist in that part of the ocean; and six of the men somehow died ashore, though Johansen is queerly reticent about this part of his story, and speaks only of their falling into a rock chasm. Later, it seems, he and one companion boarded the yacht and tried to manage her, but were beaten about by the storm of April 2nd. From that time till his rescue on the 12th the man remembers little, and he does not even recall when William Briden, his companion, died. Briden’s death reveals no apparent cause, and was probably due to excitement or exposure. Cable advices from Dunedin report that the Alert was well known there as an island trader, and bore an evil reputation along the waterfront. It was owned by a curious group of half-castes whose frequent meetings and night trips to the woods attracted no little curiosity; and it had set sail in great haste just after the storm and earth tremors of March 1st. Our Auckland correspondent gives the Emma and her crew an excellent reputation, and Johansen is described as a sober and worthy man. The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whole matter beginning tomorrow, at which every effort will be made to induce Johansen to speak more freely than he has done hitherto.
     This was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but what a train of ideas it started in my mind! Here were new treasuries of data on the Cthulhu Cult, and evidence that it had strange interests at sea as well as on land. What motive prompted the hybrid crew to order back the Emma as they sailed about with their hideous idol? What was the unknown island on which six of the Emma’s crew had died, and about which the mate Johansen was so secretive? What had the vice-admiralty’s investigation brought out, and what was known of the noxious cult in Dunedin? And most marvellous of all, what deep and more than natural linkage of dates was this which gave a malign and now undeniable significance to the various turns of events so carefully noted by my uncle?
     March 1st—our February 28th according to the International Date Line—the earthquake and storm had come. From Dunedin the Alert and her noisome crew had darted eagerly forth as if imperiously summoned, and on the other side of the earth poets and artists had begun to dream of a strange, dank Cyclopean city whilst a young sculptor had moulded in his sleep the form of the dreaded Cthulhu. March 23d the crew of the Emma landed on an unknown island and left six men dead; and on that date the dreams of sensitive men assumed a heightened vividness and darkened with dread of a giant monster’s malign pursuit, whilst an architect had gone mad and a sculptor had lapsed suddenly into delirium! And what of this storm of April 2nd—the date on which all dreams of the dank city ceased, and Wilcox emerged unharmed from the bondage of strange fever? What of all this—and of those hints of old Castro about the sunken, star-born Old Ones and their coming reign; their faithful cult and their mastery of dreams? Was I tottering on the brink of cosmic horrors beyond man’s power to bear? If so, they must be horrors of the mind alone, for in some way the second of April had put a stop to whatever monstrous menace had begun its siege of mankind’s soul.
     That evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, I bade my host adieu and took a train for San Francisco. In less than a month I was in Dunedin; where, however, I found that little was known of the strange cult-members who had lingered in the old sea-taverns. Waterfront scum was far too common for special mention; though there was vague talk about one inland trip these mongrels had made, during which faint drumming and red flame were noted on the distant hills. In Auckland I learned that Johansen had returned with yellow hair turned white after a perfunctory and inconclusive questioning at Sydney, and had thereafter sold his cottage in West Street and sailed with his wife to his old home in Oslo. Of his stirring experience he would tell his friends no more than he had told the admiralty officials, and all they could do was to give me his Oslo address.
     After that I went to Sydney and talked profitlessly with seamen and members of the vice-admiralty court. I saw the Alert, now sold and in commercial use, at Circular Quay in Sydney Cove, but gained nothing from its non-committal bulk. The crouching image with its cuttlefish head, dragon body, scaly wings, and hieroglyphed pedestal, was preserved in the Museum at Hyde Park; and I studied it long and well, finding it a thing of balefully exquisite workmanship, and with the same utter mystery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly strangeness of material which I had noted in Legrasse’s smaller specimen. Geologists, the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle; for they vowed that the world held no rock like it. Then I thought with a shudder of what old Castro had told Legrasse about the primal Great Ones: “They had come from the stars, and had brought Their images with Them.”
     Shaken with such a mental revolution as I had never before known, I now resolved to visit Mate Johansen in Oslo. Sailing for London, I reëmbarked at once for the Norwegian capital; and one autumn day landed at the trim wharves in the shadow of the Egeberg. Johansen’s address, I discovered, lay in the Old Town of King Harold Haardrada, which kept alive the name of Oslo during all the centuries that the greater city masqueraded as “Christiana”. I made the brief trip by taxicab, and knocked with palpitant heart at the door of a neat and ancient building with plastered front. A sad-faced woman in black answered my summons, and I was stung with disappointment when she told me in halting English that Gustaf Johansen was no more.
     He had not survived his return, said his wife, for the doings at sea in 1925 had broken him. He had told her no more than he had told the public, but had left a long manuscript—of “technical matters” as he said—written in English, evidently in order to safeguard her from the peril of casual perusal. During a walk through a narrow lane near the Gothenburg dock, a bundle of papers falling from an attic window had knocked him down. Two Lascar sailors at once helped him to his feet, but before the ambulance could reach him he was dead. Physicians found no adequate cause for the end, and laid it to heart trouble and a weakened constitution.
     I now felt gnawing at my vitals that dark terror which will never leave me till I, too, am at rest; “accidentally” or otherwise. Persuading the widow that my connexion with her husband’s “technical matters” was sufficient to entitle me to his manuscript, I bore the document away and began to read it on the London boat. It was a simple, rambling thing—a naive sailor’s effort at a post-facto diary—and strove to recall day by day that last awful voyage. I cannot attempt to transcribe it verbatim in all its cloudiness and redundance, but I will tell its gist enough to shew why the sound of the water against the vessel’s sides became so unendurable to me that I stopped my ears with cotton.
     Johansen, thank God, did not know quite all, even though he saw the city and the Thing, but I shall never sleep calmly again when I think of the horrors that lurk ceaselessly behind life in time and in space, and of those unhallowed blasphemies from elder stars which dream beneath the sea, known and favoured by a nightmare cult ready and eager to loose them on the world whenever another earthquake shall heave their monstrous stone city again to the sun and air.
     Johansen’s voyage had begun just as he told it to the vice-admiralty. The Emma, in ballast, had cleared Auckland on February 20th, and had felt the full force of that earthquake-born tempest which must have heaved up from the sea-bottom the horrors that filled men’s dreams. Once more under control, the ship was making good progress when held up by the Alert on March 22nd, and I could feel the mate’s regret as he wrote of her bombardment and sinking. Of the swarthy cult-fiends on the Alert he speaks with significant horror. There was some peculiarly abominable quality about them which made their destruction seem almost a duty, and Johansen shews ingenuous wonder at the charge of ruthlessness brought against his party during the proceedings of the court of inquiry. Then, driven ahead by curiosity in their captured yacht under Johansen’s command, the men sight a great stone pillar sticking out of the sea, and in S. Latitude 47° 9′, W. Longitude 126° 43′ come upon a coast-line of mingled mud, ooze, and weedy Cyclopean masonry which can be nothing less than the tangible substance of earth’s supreme terror—the nightmare corpse-city of R’lyeh, that was built in measureless aeons behind history by the vast, loathsome shapes that seeped down from the dark stars. There lay great Cthulhu and his hordes, hidden in green slimy vaults and sending out at last, after cycles incalculable, the thoughts that spread fear to the dreams of the sensitive and called imperiously to the faithful to come on a pilgrimage of liberation and restoration. All this Johansen did not suspect, but God knows he soon saw enough!
     I suppose that only a single mountain-top, the hideous monolith-crowned citadel whereon great Cthulhu was buried, actually emerged from the waters. When I think of the extent of all that may be brooding down there I almost wish to kill myself forthwith. Johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic majesty of this dripping Babylon of elder daemons, and must have guessed without guidance that it was nothing of this or of any sane planet. Awe at the unbelievable size of the greenish stone blocks, at the dizzying height of the great carven monolith, and at the stupefying identity of the colossal statues and bas-reliefs with the queer image found in the shrine on the Alert, is poignantly visible in every line of the mate’s frightened description.
     Without knowing what futurism is like, Johansen achieved something very close to it when he spoke of the city; for instead of describing any definite structure or building, he dwells only on broad impressions of vast angles and stone surfaces—surfaces too great to belong to any thing right or proper for this earth, and impious with horrible images and hieroglyphs. I mention his talk about angles because it suggests something Wilcox had told me of his awful dreams. He had said that the geometry of the dream-place he saw was abnormal, non-Euclidean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from ours. Now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazing at the terrible reality.
     Johansen and his men landed at a sloping mud-bank on this monstrous Acropolis, and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy blocks which could have been no mortal staircase. The very sun of heaven seemed distorted when viewed through the polarising miasma welling out from this sea-soaked perversion, and twisted menace and suspense lurked leeringly in those crazily elusive angles of carven rock where a second glance shewed concavity after the first shewed convexity.
     Something very like fright had come over all the explorers before anything more definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen. Each would have fled had he not feared the scorn of the others, and it was only half-heartedly that they searched—vainly, as it proved—for some portable souvenir to bear away.
     It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolith and shouted of what he had found. The rest followed him, and looked curiously at the immense carved door with the now familiar squid-dragon bas-relief. It was, Johansen said, like a great barn-door; and they all felt that it was a door because of the ornate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, though they could not decide whether it lay flat like a trap-door or slantwise like an outside cellar-door. As Wilcox would have said, the geometry of the place was all wrong. One could not be sure that the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence the relative position of everything else seemed phantasmally variable.
     Briden pushed at the stone in several places without result. Then Donovan felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing each point separately as he went. He climbed interminably along the grotesque stone moulding—that is, one would call it climbing if the thing was not after all horizontal—and the men wondered how any door in the universe could be so vast. Then, very softly and slowly, the acre-great panel began to give inward at the top; and they saw that it was balanced. Donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and rejoined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of the monstrously carven portal. In this phantasy of prismatic distortion it moved anomalously in a diagonal way, so that all the rules of matter and perspective seemed upset.
     The aperture was black with a darkness almost material. That tenebrousness was indeed a positive quality; for it obscured such parts of the inner walls as ought to have been revealed, and actually burst forth like smoke from its aeon-long imprisonment, visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away into the shrunken and gibbous sky on flapping membraneous wings. The odour arising from the newly opened depths was intolerable, and at length the quick-eared Hawkins thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound down there. Everyone listened, and everyone was listening still when It lumbered slobberingly into sight and gropingly squeezed Its gelatinous green immensity through the black doorway into the tainted outside air of that poison city of madness.
     Poor Johansen’s handwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this. Of the six men who never reached the ship, he thinks two perished of pure fright in that accursed instant. The Thing cannot be described—there is no language for such abysms of shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions of all matter, force, and cosmic order. A mountain walked or stumbled. God! What wonder that across the earth a great architect went mad, and poor Wilcox raved with fever in that telepathic instant? The Thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn of the stars, had awaked to claim his own. The stars were right again, and what an age-old cult had failed to do by design, a band of innocent sailors had done by accident. After vigintillions of years great Cthulhu was loose again, and ravening for delight.
     Three men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody turned. God rest them, if there be any rest in the universe. They were Donovan, Guerrera, and Ångstrom. Parker slipped as the other three were plunging frenziedly over endless vistas of green-crusted rock to the boat, and Johansen swears he was swallowed up by an angle of masonry which shouldn’t have been there; an angle which was acute, but behaved as if it were obtuse. So only Briden and Johansen reached the boat, and pulled desperately for the Alert as the mountainous monstrosity flopped down the slimy stones and hesitated floundering at the edge of the water.
     Steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departure of all hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few moments of feverish rushing up and down between wheel and engines to get the Alert under way. Slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribable scene, she began to churn the lethal waters; whilst on the masonry of that charnel shore that was not of earth the titan Thing from the stars slavered and gibbered like Polypheme cursing the fleeing ship of Odysseus. Then, bolder than the storied Cyclops, great Cthulhu slid greasily into the water and began to pursue with vast wave-raising strokes of cosmic potency. Briden looked back and went mad, laughing shrilly as he kept on laughing at intervals till death found him one night in the cabin whilst Johansen was wandering deliriously.
     But Johansen had not given out yet. Knowing that the Thing could surely overtake the Alert until steam was fully up, he resolved on a desperate chance; and, setting the engine for full speed, ran lightning-like on deck and reversed the wheel. There was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as the steam mounted higher and higher the brave Norwegian drove his vessel head on against the pursuing jelly which rose above the unclean froth like the stern of a daemon galleon. The awful squid-head with writhing feelers came nearly up to the bowsprit of the sturdy yacht, but Johansen drove on relentlessly. There was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastiness as of a cloven sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened graves, and a sound that the chronicler would not put on paper. For an instant the ship was befouled by an acrid and blinding green cloud, and then there was only a venomous seething astern; where—God in heaven!—the scattered plasticity of that nameless sky-spawn was nebulously recombining in its hateful original form, whilst its distance widened every second as the Alert gained impetus from its mounting steam.
     That was all. After that Johansen only brooded over the idol in the cabin and attended to a few matters of food for himself and the laughing maniac by his side. He did not try to navigate after the first bold flight, for the reaction had taken something out of his soul. Then came the storm of April 2nd, and a gathering of the clouds about his consciousness. There is a sense of spectral whirling through liquid gulfs of infinity, of dizzying rides through reeling universes on a comet’s tail, and of hysterical plunges from the pit to the moon and from the moon back again to the pit, all livened by a cachinnating chorus of the distorted, hilarious elder gods and the green, bat-winged mocking imps of Tartarus.
     Out of that dream came rescue—the Vigilant, the vice-admiralty court, the streets of Dunedin, and the long voyage back home to the old house by the Egeberg. He could not tell—they would think him mad. He would write of what he knew before death came, but his wife must not guess. Death would be a boon if only it could blot out the memories.
     That was the document I read, and now I have placed it in the tin box beside the bas-relief and the papers of Professor Angell. With it shall go this record of mine—this test of my own sanity, wherein is pieced together that which I hope may never be pieced together again. I have looked upon all that the universe has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me. But I do not think my life will be long. As my uncle went, as poor Johansen went, so I shall go. I know too much, and the cult still lives.
     Cthulhu still lives, too, I suppose, again in that chasm of stone which has shielded him since the sun was young. His accursed city is sunken once more, for the Vigilant sailed over the spot after the April storm; but his ministers on earth still bellow and prance and slay around idol-capped monoliths in lonely places. He must have been trapped by the sinking whilst within his black abyss, or else the world would by now be screaming with fright and frenzy. Who knows the end? What has risen may sink, and what has sunk may rise. Loathsomeness waits and dreams in the deep, and decay spreads over the tottering cities of men. A time will come—but I must not and cannot think! Let me pray that, if I do not survive this manuscript, my executors may put caution before audacity and see that it meets no other eye.
 
Necronomicon

Original title Al Azif—azif being the word used by Arabs to designate that nocturnal sound (made by insects) suppos’d to be the howling of daemons.
     Composed by Abdul Alhazred, a mad poet of Sanaá, in Yemen, who is said to have flourished during the period of the Ommiade caliphs, circa 700 A.D. He visited the ruins of Babylon and the subterranean secrets of Memphis and spent ten years alone in the great southern desert of Arabia—the Roba el Khaliyeh or “Empty Space” of the ancients—and “Dahna” or “Crimson” desert of the modern Arabs, which is held to be inhabited by protective evil spirits and monsters of death. Of this desert many strange and unbelievable marvels are told by those who pretend to have penetrated it. In his last years Alhazred dwelt in Damascus, where the Necronomicon (Al Azif) was written, and of his final death or disappearance (738 A.D.) many terrible and conflicting things are told. He is said by Ebn Khallikan (12th cent. biographer) to have been seized by an invisible monster in broad daylight and devoured horribly before a large number of fright-frozen witnesses. Of his madness many things are told. He claimed to have seen fabulous Irem, or City of Pillars, and to have found beneath the ruins of a certain nameless desert town the shocking annals and secrets of a race older than mankind. He was only an indifferent Moslem, worshipping unknown entities whom he called Yog-Sothoth and Cthulhu.
     In A.D. 950 the Azif, which had gained a considerable tho’ surreptitious circulation amongst the philosophers of the age, was secretly translated into Greek by Theodorus Philetas of Constantinople under the title Necronomicon. For a century it impelled certain experimenters to terrible attempts, when it was suppressed and burnt by the patriarch Michael. After this it is only heard of furtively, but (1228) Olaus Wormius made a Latin translation later in the Middle Ages, and the Latin text was printed twice—once in the fifteenth century in black-letter (evidently in Germany) and once in the seventeenth (prob. Spanish)—both editions being without identifying marks, and located as to time and place by internal typographical evidence only. The work both Latin and Greek was banned by Pope Gregory IX in 1232, shortly after its Latin translation, which called attention to it. The Arabic original was lost as early as Wormius’ time, as indicated by his prefatory note; and no sight of the Greek copy—which was printed in Italy between 1500 and 1550—has been reported since the burning of a certain Salem man’s library in 1692. An English translation made by Dr. Dee was never printed, and exists only in fragments recovered from the original manuscript. Of the Latin texts now existing one (15th cent.) is known to be in the British Museum under lock and key, while another (17th cent.) is in the Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris. A seventeenth-century edition is in the Widener Library at Harvard, and in the library of Miskatonic University at Arkham. Also in the library of the University of Buenos Ayres. Numerous other copies probably exist in secret, and a fifteenth-century one is persistently rumoured to form part of the collection of a celebrated American millionaire. A still vaguer rumour credits the preservation of a sixteenth-century Greek text in the Salem family of Pickman; but if it was so preserved, it vanished with the artist R.U. Pickman, who disappeared early in 1926. The book is rigidly suppressed by the authorities of most countries, and by all branches of organised ecclesiasticism. Reading leads to terrible consequences. It was from rumours of this book (of which relatively few of the general public know) that R.W. Chambers is said to have derived the idea of his early novel The King in Yellow.

A little after noon on the twenty-eighth day of June, 1924, Dr. Morehouse stopped his machine before the Tanner place and four men alighted. The stone building, in perfect repair and freshness, stood near the road, and but for the swamp in the rear it would have possessed no trace of dark suggestion. The spotless white doorway was visible across a trim lawn for some distance down the road; and as the doctor’s party approached, it could be seen that the heavy portal yawned wide open. Only the screen door was closed. The proximity of the house had imposed a kind of nervous silence on the four men, for what lurked therein could only be imagined with vague terror. This terror underwent a marked abatement when the explorers heard distinctly the sound of Richard Blake’s typewriter.
     Less than an hour before, a grown man had fled from that house, hatless, coatless, and screaming, to fall upon the doorstep of his nearest neighbor, half a mile away, babbling incoherently of “house”, “dark”, “swamp”, and “room”. Dr. Morehouse had needed no further spur to excited action when told that a slavering, maddened creature had burst out of the old Tanner home by the edge of the swamp. He had known that something would happen when the two men had taken the accursed stone house—the man who had fled; and his master, Richard Blake, the author-poet from Boston, the genius who had gone into the war with every nerve and sense alert and had come out as he was now; still debonair though half a paralytic, still walking with song among the sights and sounds of living fantasy though shut forever from the physical world, deaf, dumb, and blind!
     Blake had reveled in the weird traditions and shuddering hints about the house and its former tenants. Such eldritch lore was an imaginative asset from whose enjoyment his physical state might not bar him. He had smiled at the prognostications of the superstitious natives. Now, with his sole companion fled in a mad ecstasy of panic fright, and himself left helpless with whatever had caused that fright, Blake might have less occasion to revel and smile! This, at least, was Dr. Morehouse’s reflection as he had faced the problem of the fugitive and called on the puzzled cottager to help him track the matter down. The Morehouses were an old Fenham family, and the doctor’s grandfather had been one of those who burned the hermit Simeon Tanner’s body in 1819. Not even at this distance could the trained physician escape a spinal tingle at what was recorded of that burning—at the naive inferences drawn by ignorant countrymen from a slight and meaningless conformation of the deceased. That tingle he knew to be foolish, for trifling bony protuberances on the fore part of the skull are of no significance, and often observable in bald-headed men.
     Among the four men who ultimately set resolute faces toward that abhorrent house in the doctor’s care, there occurred a singularly awed exchange of vague legends and half-furtive scraps of gossip handed down from curious grandmothers—legends and hints seldom repeated and almost never systematically compared. They extended as far back as 1692, when a Tanner had perished on Gallows Hill in Salem after a witchcraft trial, but did not grow intimate till the time the house was built—1747, though the ell was more recent. Not even then were the tales very numerous, for queer though the Tanners all were, it was only the last of them, old Simeon, whom people desperately feared. He added to what he had inherited—added horribly, everyone whispered—and bricked up the windows of the southeast room, whose east wall gave on the swamp. That was his study and library, and it had a door of double thickness with braces. It had been chopped through with axes that terrible winter night in 1819 when the stinking smoke had poured from the chimney and they found Tanner’s body in there—with that expression on its face. It was because of that expression—not because of the two bony protuberances beneath the bushy white hair—that they had burned the body and the books and manuscripts it had had in that room. However, the short distance to the Tanner place was covered before much important historical matter could be correlated.
     As the doctor, at the head of the party, opened the screen door and entered the arched hallway, it was noticed that the sound of typewriting had suddenly ceased. At this point two of the men also thought they noticed a faint effusion of cold air strangely out of keeping with the great heat of the day, though they afterward refused to swear to this. The hall was in perfect order, as were the various rooms entered in quest of the study where Blake was presumably to be found. The author had furnished his home in exquisite Colonial taste; and though having no help but the one manservant, he had succeeded in maintaining it in a state of commendable neatness.
     Dr. Morehouse led his men from room to room through the wide-open doors and archways, at last finding the library or study which he sought—a fine southerly room on the ground floor adjoining the once-dreaded study of Simeon Tanner, lined with the books which the servant communicated through an ingenious alphabet of touches, and the bulky Braille volumes which the author himself read with sensitive finger-tips. Richard Blake, of course, was there, seated as usual before his typewriter with a draft-scattered stack of newly written pages on the table and floor, and one sheet still in the machine. He had stopped work, it appeared, with some suddenness; perhaps because of a chill which had caused him to draw together the neck of his dressing-gown; and his head was turned toward the doorway of the sunny adjoining room in a manner quite singular for one whose lack of sight and hearing shuts out all sense of the external world.
     On drawing nearer and crossing to where he could see the author’s face, Dr. Morehouse turned very pale and motioned to the others to stand back. He needed time to steady himself, and to dispel all possibility of hideous illusion. No longer did he need to speculate why they had burned old Simeon Tanner’s body on that wintry night because of the expression it wore, for here was something only a well-disciplined mind could confront. The late Richard Blake, whose typewriter had ceased its nonchalant clicking only as the men had entered the house, had seen something despite his blindness, and had been affected by it. Humanity had nothing to do with the look that was on his face, or with the glassy morbid vision that blazed in great, blue, bloodshot eyes shut to this world’s images for six years. Those eyes were fixed with an ecstasy of clear-sighted horror on the doorway leading to Simeon Tanner’s old study, where the sun blazed on walls once shrouded in bricked-up blackness. And Dr. Arlo Morehouse reeled dizzily when he saw that for all the dazzling daylight the inky pupils of those eyes were dilated as cavernously as those of a cat’s eyes in the dark.
     The doctor closed the staring blind eyes before he let the others view the face of the corpse. Meanwhile he examined the lifeless form with feverish diligence, using scrupulous technical care, despite his throbbing nerves and almost shaking hands. Some of his results he communicated from time to time to the awed and inquisitive trio around him; other results he judiciously withheld, lest they lead to speculations more disquieting than human speculations should be. It was not from any word of his, but from shrewd independent observation, that one of the men muttered about the body’s tousled black hair and the way the papers were scattered. This man said it was as if a strong breeze had blown through the open doorway which the dead man faced; whereas, although the once-bricked windows beyond were indeed fully open to the warm June air, there had been scarcely a breath of wind during the entire day.
     When one of the men began to gather the sheets of newly written manuscript as they lay on floor and table, Dr. Morehouse stopped him with an alarmed gesture. He had seen the sheet that remained in the machine, and had hastily removed and pocketed it after a sentence or two blanched his face afresh. This incident prompted him to collect the scattered sheets himself, and stuff them bulkily into an inside pocket without stopping to arrange them. And not even what he had read terrified him half so much as what he now noticed—the subtle difference in touch and heaviness of typing which distinguished the sheets he picked up from the one he had found on the typewriter. This shadowy impression he could not divorce from that other horrible circumstance which he was so zealously concealing from the men who had heard the machine’s clicking not ten minutes before—the circumstance he was trying to exclude from even his own mind till he could be alone and resting in the merciful depths of his Morris chair. One may judge of the fear he felt at that circumstance by considering what he braved to keep it suppressed. In more than thirty years of professional practice he had never regarded a medical examiner as one from whom a fact might be withheld; yet through all the formalities which now followed, no man ever knew that when he examined this staring, contorted, blind man’s body he had seen at once that death must have occurred at least half an hour before discovery.
     Dr. Morehouse presently closed the outer door and led the party through every corner of the ancient structure in search of any evidence which might directly illuminate the tragedy. Never was a result more completely negative. He knew that the trap-door of old Simeon Tanner had been removed as soon as that recluse’s books and body had been burnt, and that the sub-cellar and the sinuous tunnel under the swamp had been filled up as soon as they were discovered, some thirty-five years later. Now he saw that no fresh abnormalities had come to replace them, and that the whole establishment exhibited only the normal neatness of modern restoration and tasteful care.
     Telephoning for the sheriff at Fenham and for the county medical examiner at Bayboro, he awaited the arrival of the former, who, when he came, insisted on swearing in two of the men as deputies until the examiner should arrive. Dr. Morehouse, knowing the mystification and futility confronting the officials, could not help smiling wryly as he left with the villager whose house still sheltered the man who had fled.
     They found the patient exceedingly weak, but conscious and fairly composed. Having promised the sheriff to extract and transmit all possible information from the fugitive, Dr. Morehouse began some calm and tactful questioning, which was received in a rational and compliant spirit and baffled only by effacement of memory. Much of the man’s quiet must have come from merciful inability to recollect, for all he could now tell was that he had been in the study with his master and had seemed to see the next room suddenly grow dark—the room where sunshine had for more than a hundred years replaced the gloom of bricked-up windows. Even this memory, which indeed he half doubted, greatly disturbed the unstrung nerves of the patient, and it was with the utmost gentleness and circumspection that Dr. Morehouse told him his master was dead—a natural victim of the cardiac weakness which his terrible wartime injuries must have caused. The man was grieved, for he had been devoted to the crippled author; but he promised to show fortitude in taking the body back to the family in Boston after the close of the medical examiner’s formal inquiry.
     The physician, after satisfying as vaguely as possible the curiosity of the householder and his wife, and urging them to shelter the patient and keep him from the Tanner house until his departure with the body, next drove home in a growing tremble of excitement. At last he was free to read the typed manuscript of the dead man, and to gain at least an inkling of what hellish thing had defied those shattered senses of sight and sound and penetrated so disastrously to the delicate intelligence that brooded in external darkness and silence. He knew it would be a grotesque and terrible perusal, and he did not hasten to begin it. Instead, he very deliberately put his car in the garage, made himself comfortable in a dressing-gown, and placed a stand of sedative and restorative medicines beside the great chair he was to occupy. Even after that he obviously wasted time as he slowly arranged the numbered sheets, carefully avoiding any comprehensive glance at their text.
     What the manuscript did to Dr. Morehouse we all know. It would never have been read by another had his wife not picked it up as he lay inert in his chair an hour later, breathing heavily and unresponsive to a knocking which one would have thought violent enough to arouse a mummied Pharaoh. Terrible as the document is, particularly in the obvious change of style near the end, we cannot avoid the belief that to the folklore-wise physician it presented some added and supreme horror which no other will ever be so unfortunate as to receive. Certainly, it is the general opinion of Fenham that the doctor’s wide familiarity with the mutterings of old people and the tales his grandfather told him in youth furnished him some special information, in the light of which Richard Blake’s hideous chronicle acquired a new, clear, and devastating significance nearly insupportable to the normal human mind. That would explain the slowness of his recovery on that June evening, the reluctance with which he permitted his wife and son to read the manuscript, the singular ill-grace with which he acceded to their determination not to burn a document so darkly remarkable, and most of all, the peculiar rashness with which he hastened to purchase the old Tanner property, destroy the house with dynamite, and cut down the trees of the swamp for a substantial distance from the road. Concerning the whole subject he now maintains an inflexible reticence, and it is certain that there will die with him a knowledge without which the world is better off.
     The manuscript, as here appended, was copied through the courtesy of Floyd Morehouse, Esq., son of the physician. A few omissions, indicated by asterisks, have been made in the interest of the public peace of mind; still others have been occasioned by the indefiniteness of the text, where the stricken author’s lightning-like touch-typing seems shaken into incoherence or ambiguity. In three places, where lacunae are fairly well elucidated by the context, the task of recension has been attempted. Of the change in style near the end it were best to say nothing. Surely it is plausible enough to attribute the phenomenon, as regards both content and physical aspect of typing, to the racked and tottering mind of a victim whose former handicaps had paled to nothing before that which he now faced. Bolder minds are at liberty to supply their own deductions.
     Here, then, is the document, written in an accursed house by a brain closed to the world’s sights and sounds—a brain left alone and unwarned to the mercies and mockeries of powers that no seeing, hearing man has ever stayed to face. Contradictory as it is to all that we know of the universe through physics, chemistry, and biology, the logical mind will classify it as a singular product of dementia—a dementia communicated in some sympathetic way to the man who burst out of that house in time. And thus, indeed, may it very well be regarded so long as Dr. Arlo Morehouse maintains his silence.

THE MANUSCRIPT

     Vague misgivings of the last quarter hour are now becoming definite fears. To begin with, I am thoroughly convinced that something must have happened to Dobbs. For the first time since we have been together he has failed to answer my summons. When he did not respond to my repeated ringing I decided that the bell must be out of order, but I have pounded on the table with vigor enough to rouse a charge of Charon. At first I thought he might have slipped out of the house for a breath of fresh air, for it has been hot and sultry all the forenoon, but it is not like Dobbs to stay away so long without first making sure that I would want nothing. It is, however, the unusual occurrence of the last few minutes which confirms my suspicion that Dobbs’s absence is a matter beyond his control. It is this same happening which prompts me to put my impressions and conjectures on paper in the hope that the mere act of recording them may relieve a certain sinister suggestion of impending tragedy. Try as I will, I cannot free my mind from the legends connected with this old house—mere superstitious fol-de-rol for dwarfed brains to revel in, and on which I would not even waste a thought if Dobbs were here.
     Through the years that I have been shut away from the world I used to know, Dobbs has been my sixth sense. Now, for the first time since my incapacitation, I realize the full extent of my impotency. It is Dobbs who had compensated for my sightless eyes, my useless ears, my voiceless throat, and my crippled legs. There is a glass of water on my typewriter table. Without Dobbs to fill it when it has been emptied, my plight will be like that of Tantalus. Few have come to this house since we have lived here—there is little in common between garrulous country folk and a paralytic who cannot see, hear, or speak to them—it may be days before anyone else appears. Alone . . . with only my thoughts to keep me company; disquieting thoughts which have been in no wise assuaged by the sensations of the last few minutes. I do not like these sensations, either, for more and more they are converting mere village gossip into a fantastic imagery which affects my emotions in a most peculiar and almost unprecedented manner.
     It seems hours since I started to write this, but I know it can be only a few minutes, for I have just inserted this fresh page into the machine. The mechanical action of switching the sheets, brief though it was, has given me a fresh grip on myself. Perhaps I can shake off this sense of approaching danger long enough to recount that which has already happened.
     At first it was no more than a mere tremor, somewhat similar to the shivering of a cheap tenement block when a heavy truck rumbles close by the curb—but this is no loosely built frame structure. Perhaps I am supersensitive to such things, and it may be that I am allowing my imagination to play tricks; but it seemed to me that the disturbance was more pronounced directly in front of me—and my chair faces the southeast wing; away from the road, directly in line with the swamp at the rear of the dwelling! Delusion though this may have been, there is no denying what followed. I was reminded of moments when I have felt the ground tremble beneath my feet at the bursting of giant shells; times when I have seen ships tossed like chaff before the fury of a typhoon. The house shook like a Dweurgarian cinder in the sieves of Niflheim. Every timber in the floor beneath my feet quivered like a suffering thing. My typewriter trembled till I could imagine that the keys were chattering of their fear.
     A brief moment and it was over. Everything is as calm as before. Altogether too calm! It seems impossible that such a thing could happen and yet leave everything exactly as it was before. No, not exactly—I am thoroughly convinced that something has happened to Dobbs! It is this conviction, added to this unnatural calm, which accentuates the premonitory fear that persists in creeping over me. Fear? Yes—though I am trying to reason sanely with myself that there is nothing of which to be afraid. Critics have both praised and condemned my poetry because of what they term a vivid imagination. At such a time as this I can heartily agree with those who cry “too vivid”. Nothing can be very much amiss or. . . .
     Smoke! Just a faint sulfurous trace, but one which is unmistakable to my keenly attuned nostrils. So faint, indeed, that it is impossible for me to determine whether it comes from some part of the house or drifts through the window of the adjoining room, which opens on the swamp. The impression is rapidly becoming more clearly defined. I am sure, now, that it does not come from outside. Vagrant visions of the past, somber scenes of other days, flash before me in stereoscopic review. A flaming factory . . . hysterical screams of terrified women penned in by walls of fire; a blazing schoolhouse . . . pitiful cries of helpless children trapped by collapsing stairs, a theatre fire . . . frantic babel of panic-stricken people fighting to freedom over blistering floors; and, over all, impenetrable clouds of black, noxious, malicious smoke polluting the peaceful sky. The air of the room is saturated with thick, heavy, stifling waves . . . at any moment I expect to feel hot tongues of flame lick eagerly at my useless legs . . . my eyes smart . . . my ears throb . . . I cough and choke to rid my lungs of the Ocypetean fumes . . . smoke such as is associated only with appalling catastrophes . . . acrid, stinking, mephitic smoke permeated with the revolting odor of burning flesh * * *
     Once more I am alone with this portentous calm. The welcome breeze that fans my cheeks is fast restoring my vanished courage. Clearly, the house cannot be on fire, for every vestige of the torturous smoke is gone. I cannot detect a single trace of it, though I have been sniffing like a bloodhound. I am beginning to wonder if I am going mad; if the years of solitude have unhinged my mind—but the phenomenon has been too definite to permit me to class it as mere hallucination. Sane or insane, I cannot conceive these things as aught but actualities—and the moment I catalogue them as such I can come to only one logical conclusion. The inference in itself is enough to upset one’s mental stability. To concede this is to grant the truth of the superstitious rumors which Dobbs compiled from the villagers and transcribed for my sensitive finger-tips to read—unsubstantial hearsay that my materialistic mind instinctively condemns as asininity!
     I wish the throbbing in my ears would stop! It is as if mad spectral players were beating a duet upon the aching drums. I suppose it is merely a reaction to the suffocating sensations I have just experienced. A few more deep drafts of this refreshing air . . .
     Something—someone is in the room! I am as sure I am no longer alone as if I could see the presence I sense so infallibly. It is an impression quite similar to one which I have had while elbowing my way through a crowded street—the definite notion that eyes were singling me out from the rest of the throng with a gaze intense enough to arrest my subconscious attention—the same sensation, only magnified a thousandfold. Who—what—can it be? After all, my fears may be groundless, perhaps it means only that Dobbs has returned. No . . . it is not Dobbs. As I anticipated, the tattoo upon my ears has ceased and a low whisper has caught my attention . . . the overwhelming significance of the thing has just registered itself upon my bewildered brain . . . I can hear!
     It is not a single whispering voice, but many! * * * Lecherous buzzing of bestial blowflies . . . Satanic humming of libidinous bees . . . sibilant hissing of obscene reptiles . . . a whispering chorus no human throat could sing! It is gaining in volume . . . the room rings with demoniacal chanting; tuneless, toneless, and grotesquely grim . . . a diabolical choir rehearsing unholy litanies . . . paeans of Mephistophelian misery set to music of wailing souls . . . a hideous crescendo of pagan pandemonium * * *
     The voices that surround me are drawing closer to my chair. The chanting has come to an abrupt end and the whispering has resolved itself into intelligible sounds. I strain my ears to distinguish the words. Closer . . . and still closer. They are clear, now—too clear! Better had my ears been blocked forever than forced to listen to their hellish mouthings * * *
     Impious revelations of soul-sickening Saturnalia * * * ghoulish conceptions of devastating debaucheries * * * profane bribes of Cabirian orgies * * * malevolent threats of unimagined punishments * * *
     It is cold. Unseasonably cold! As if inspired by the cacodemoniacal presences that harass me, the breeze that was so friendly a few minutes ago growls angrily about my ears—an icy gale that rushes in from the swamp and chills me to the bone.
     If Dobbs has deserted me I do not blame him. I hold no brief for cowardice or craven fear, but there are some things * * * I only hope his fate has been nothing worse than to have departed in time!
     My last doubt is swept away. I am doubly glad, now, that I have held to my resolve to write down my impressions . . . not that I expect anyone to understand . . . or believe . . . it has been a relief from the maddening strain of idly waiting for each new manifestation of psychic abnormality. As I see it, there are but three courses that may be taken: to flee from this accursed place and spend the torturous years that lie ahead in trying to forget—but flee I cannot; to yield to an abominable alliance with forces so malign that Tartarus to them would seem but an alcove of Paradise—but yield I will not; to die—far rather would I have my body torn limb from limb than to contaminate my soul in barbarous barter with such emissaries of Belial * * *
     I have had to pause for a moment to blow upon my fingers. The room is cold with the foetid frigor of the tomb . . . a peaceful numbness is creeping over me . . . I must fight off this lassitude; it is undermining my determination to die rather than give in to the insidious importunings . . . I vow, anew, to resist until the end . . . the end that I know cannot be far away * * *
     The wind is colder than ever, if such a thing be possible . . . a wind freighted with the stench of dead-alive things * * * O merciful God Who took my sight! * * * a wind so cold it burns where it should freeze . . . it has become a blistering sirocco * * *
     Unseen fingers grip me . . . ghost fingers that lack the physical strength to force me from my machine . . . icy fingers that force me into a vile vortex of vice . . . devil-fingers that draw me down into a cesspool of eternal iniquity . . . death fingers that shut off my breath and make my sightless eyes feel they must burst with the pain * * * frozen points press against my temples * * * hard, bony knobs, akin to horns * * * boreal breath of some long-dead thing kisses my fevered lips and sears my hot throat with frozen flame * * *
     It is dark * * * not the darkness that is part of years of blindness * * * the impenetrable darkness of sin-steeped night * * * the pitch-black darkness of Purgatory * * *
     I see * * * spes mea Christus! * * * it is the end * * *

* * * * * * * * * * *

     Not for mortal mind is any resisting of force beyond human imagination. Not for immortal spirit is any conquering of that which hath probed the depths and made of immortality a transient moment. The end? Nay! It is but the blissful beginning. . . .


THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY

          BY   DOUGLAS ADAMS




              2001 HANOMAG
            DOCUMENT VERSION 1.0
COPYRIGHT © DOUGLAS ADAMS
                   for Jonny Brock and Clare Gorst and all other Arlingtonians
                                                 for tea, sympathy, and a sofa

Far out in the uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of
the western spiral arm of the Galaxy lies a small unregarded
yellow sun.

Orbiting this at a distance of roughly ninety-two million miles is
an utterly insignificant little blue green planet whose ape-
descended life forms are so amazingly primitive that they still
think digital watches are a pretty neat idea.

This planet has - or rather had - a problem, which was this: most
of the people on it were unhappy for pretty much of the time.
Many solutions were suggested for this problem, but most of
these were largely concerned with the movements of small green
pieces of paper, which is odd because on the whole it wasn't the
small green pieces of paper that were unhappy.

And so the problem remained; lots of the people were mean, and
most of them were miserable, even the ones with digital watches.

Many were increasingly of the opinion that they'd all made a big
mistake in coming down from the trees in the first place. And
some said that even the trees had been a bad move, and that no
one should ever have left the oceans.

And then, one Thursday, nearly two thousand years after one
man had been nailed to a tree for saying how great it would be to
be nice to people for a change, one girl sitting on her own in a
small cafe in Rickmansworth suddenly realized what it was that
had been going wrong all this time, and she finally knew how the
world could be made a good and happy place. This time it was
right, it would work, and no one would have to get nailed to
anything.
                         4 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Sadly, however, before she could get to a phone to tell anyone-
about it, a terribly stupid catastrophe occurred, and the idea was
lost forever.

This is not her story.

But it is the story of that terrible stupid catastrophe and some of
its consequences.

It is also the story of a book, a book called The Hitch Hiker's
Guide to the Galaxy - not an Earth book, never published on
Earth, and until the terrible catastrophe occurred, never seen or
heard of by any Earthman.

Nevertheless, a wholly remarkable book.

in fact it was probably the most remarkable book ever to come
out of the great publishing houses of Ursa Minor - of which no
Earthman had ever heard either.

Not only is it a wholly remarkable book, it is also a highly
successful one - more popular than the Celestial Home Care
Omnibus, better selling than Fifty More Things to do in Zero
Gravity, and more controversial than Oolon Colluphid's trilogy of
philosophical blockbusters Where God Went Wrong, Some More
of God's Greatest Mistakes and Who is this God Person Anyway?

In many of the more relaxed civilizations on the Outer Eastern
Rim of the Galaxy, the Hitch Hiker's Guide has already
supplanted the great Encyclopedia Galactica as the standard
repository of all knowledge and wisdom, for though it has many
omissions and contains much that is apocryphal, or at least wildly
inaccurate, it scores over the older, more pedestrian work in two
important respects.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          5

First, it is slightly cheaper; and secondly it has the words Don't
Panic inscribed in large friendly letters on its cover.

But the story of this terrible, stupid Thursday, the story of its
extraordinary consequences, and the story of how these
consequences are inextricably intertwined with this remarkable
book begins very simply.

It begins with a house.
                       6 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

The house stood on a slight rise just on the edge of the village. It
stood on its own and looked over a broad spread of West
Country farmland. Not a remarkable house by any means - it
was about thirty years old, squattish, squarish, made of brick, and
had four windows set in the front of a size and proportion which
more or less exactly failed to please the eye.

The only person for whom the house was in any way special was
Arthur Dent, and that was only because it happened to be the
one he lived in. He had lived in it for about three years, ever
since he had moved out of London because it made him nervous
and irritable. He was about thirty as well, dark haired and never-
quite at ease with himself. The thing that used to worry him
most was the fact that people always used to ask him what he was
looking so worried about. He worked in local radio which he
always used to tell his friends was a lot more interesting than they
probably thought. It was, too - most of his friends worked in
advertising.

It hadn't properly registered with Arthur that the council wanted
to knock down his house and build a bypass instead.

At eight o'clock on Thursday morning Arthur didn't feel very
good. He woke up blearily, got up, wandered blearily round his
room, opened a window, saw a bulldozer, found his slippers, and
stomped off to the bathroom to wash.

Toothpaste on the brush - so. Scrub.

Shaving mirror - pointing at the ceiling. He adjusted it. For a
moment it reflected a second bulldozer through the bathroom
window. Properly adjusted, it reflected Arthur Dent's bristles.
He shaved them off, washed, dried, and stomped off to the
kitchen to find something pleasant to put in his mouth.
         THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         7

Kettle, plug, fridge, milk, coffee. Yawn.

The word bulldozer wandered through his mind for a moment
in search of something to connect with.

The bulldozer outside the kitchen window was quite a big one.

He stared at it.

"Yellow," he thought and stomped off back to his bedroom to get
dressed.

Passing the bathroom he stopped to drink a large glass of water,
and another. He began to suspect that he was hung over. Why
was he hung over? Had he been drinking the night before? He
supposed that he must have been. He caught a glint in the
shaving mirror. "Yellow," he thought and stomped on to the
bedroom.

He stood and thought. The pub, he thought. Oh dear, the pub.
He vaguely remembered being angry, angry about something
that seemed important. He'd been telling people about it, telling
people about it at great length, he rather suspected: his clearest
visual recollection was of glazed looks on other people's faces.
Something about a new bypass he had just found out about. It
had been in the pipeline for months only no one seemed to have
known about it. Ridiculous. He took a swig of water. It would
sort itself out, he'd decided, no one wanted a bypass, the council
didn't have a leg to stand on. It would sort itself out.

God what a terrible hangover it had earned him though. He
looked at himself in the wardrobe mirror. He stuck out his
tongue. "Yellow," he thought. The word yellow wandered
through his mind in search of something to connect with.
                        8 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Fifteen seconds later he was out of the house and lying in front of
a big yellow bulldozer that was advancing up his garden path.
Mr L Prosser was, as they say, only human. In other words he
was a carbon-based life form descended from an ape. More
specifically he was forty, fat and shabby and worked for the local
council. Curiously enough, though he didn't know it, he was also
a direct male-line descendant of Genghis Khan, though
intervening generations and racial mixing had so juggled his
genes that he had no discernible Mongoloid characteristics, and
the only vestiges left in Mr L Prosser of his mighty ancestry were
a pronounced stoutness about the tum and a predilection for
little fur hats.

He was by no means a great warrior: in fact he was a nervous
worried man. Today he was particularly nervous and worried
because something had gone seriously wrong with his job - which
was to see that Arthur Dent's house got cleared out of the way
before the day was out.

"Come off it, Mr Dent,", he said, "you can't win you know. You
can't lie in front of the bulldozer indefinitely." He tried to make
his eyes blaze fiercely but they just wouldn't do it.

Arthur lay in the mud and squelched at him.

"I'm game," he said, "we'll see who rusts first."

"I'm afraid you're going to have to accept it," said Mr Prosser
gripping his fur hat and rolling it round the top of his head, "this
bypass has got to be built and it's going to be built!"

"First I've heard of it," said Arthur, "why's it going to be built?"

Mr Prosser shook his finger at him for a bit, then stopped and
put it away again.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          9

"What do you mean, why's it got to be built?" he said. "It's a
bypass. You've got to build bypasses."

Bypasses are devices which allow some people to drive from
point A to point B very fast whilst other people dash from point
B to point A very fast. People living at point C, being a point
directly in between, are often given to wonder what's so great
about point A that so many people of point B are so keen to get
there, and what's so great about point B that so many people of
point A are so keen to get there. They often wish that people
would just once and for all work out where the hell they wanted
to be.

Mr Prosser wanted to be at point D. Point D wasn't anywhere in
particular, it was just any convenient point a very long way from
points A, B and C. He would have a nice little cottage at point D,
with axes over the door, and spend a pleasant amount of time at
point E, which would be the nearest pub to point D. His wife of
course wanted climbing roses, but he wanted axes. He didn't
know why - he just liked axes. He flushed hotly under the
derisive grins of the bulldozer drivers.

He shifted his weight from foot to foot, but it was equally
uncomfortable on each.       Obviously somebody had been
appallingly incompetent and he hoped to God it wasn't him.

Mr Prosser said: "You were quite entitled to make any
suggestions or protests at the appropriate time you know."

"Appropriate time?" hooted Arthur. "Appropriate time? The first
I knew about it was when a workman arrived at my home
yesterday. I asked him if he'd come to clean the windows and he
said no he'd come to demolish the house. He didn't tell me
                        10 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

straight away of course. Oh no. First he wiped a couple of
windows and charged me a fiver. Then he told me."

"But Mr Dent, the plans have been available in the local planning
office for the last nine month."

"Oh yes, well as soon as I heard I went straight round to see
them, yesterday afternoon. You hadn't exactly gone out of your
way to call attention to them had you? I mean like actually telling
anybody or anything."

"But the plans were on display ..."

"On display? I eventually had to go down to the cellar to find
them."

"That's the display department."

"With a torch."

"Ah, well the lights had probably gone."

"So had the stairs."

"But look, you found the notice didn't you?"

"Yes," said Arthur, "yes I did. It was on display in the bottom of a
locked filing cabinet stuck in a disused lavatory with a sign on the
door saying Beware of the Leopard."

A cloud passed overhead. It cast a shadow over Arthur Dent as
he lay propped up on his elbow in the cold mud. It cast a
shadow over Arthur Dent's house. Mr Prosser frowned at it.

"It's not as if it's a particularly nice house," he said.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /        11

"I'm sorry, but I happen to like it."

"You'll like the bypass."

"Oh shut up," said Arthur Dent. "Shut up and go away, and take
your bloody bypass with you. You haven't got a leg to stand on
and you know it."

Mr Prosser's mouth opened and closed a couple of times while
his mind was for a moment filled with inexplicable but terribly
attractive visions of Arthur Dent's house being consumed with
fire and Arthur himself running screaming from the blazing ruin
with at least three hefty spears protruding from his back. Mr
Prosser was often bothered with visions like these and they made
him feel very nervous. He stuttered for a moment and then
pulled himself together.

"Mr Dent," he said.

"Hello? Yes?" said Arthur.

"Some factual information for you. Have you any idea how much
damage that bulldozer would suffer if I just let it roll straight
over you?"

"How much?" said Arthur.

"None at all," said Mr Prosser, and stormed nervously off
wondering why his brain was filled with a thousand hairy
horsemen all shouting at him.

By a curious coincidence, None at all is exactly how much
suspicion the ape-descendant Arthur Dent had that one of his
closest friends was not descended from an ape, but was in fact
                     12 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

from a small planet in the vicinity of Betelgeuse and not from
Guildford as he usually claimed.

Arthur Dent had never, ever suspected this.

This friend of his had first arrived on the planet some fifteen
Earth years previously, and he had worked hard to blend himself
into Earth society - with, it must be said, some success. For
instance he had spent those fifteen years pretending to be an out
of work actor, which was plausible enough.

He had made one careless blunder though, because he had
skimped a bit on his preparatory research. The information he
had gathered had led him to choose the name "Ford Prefect" as
being nicely inconspicuous.

He was not conspicuously tall, his features were striking but not
conspicuously handsome. His hair was wiry and gingerish and
brushed backwards from the temples. His skin seemed to be
pulled backwards from the nose. There was something very
slightly odd about him, but it was difficult to say what it was.
Perhaps it was that his eyes didn't blink often enough and when
you talked to him for any length of time your eyes began
involuntarily to water on his behalf. Perhaps it was that he
smiled slightly too broadly and gave people the unnerving
impression that he was about to go for their neck.

He struck most of the friends he had made on Earth as an
eccentric, but a harmless one -- an unruly boozer with some
oddish habits. For instance he would often gatecrash university
parties, get badly drunk and start making fun of any
astrophysicist he could find till he got thrown out.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /            13

Sometimes he would get seized with oddly distracted moods and
stare into the sky as if hypnotized until someone asked him what
he was doing. Then he would start guiltily for a moment, relax
and grin. "Oh, just looking for flying saucers," he would joke and
everyone would laugh and ask him what sort of flying saucers he
was looking for.

"Green ones!" he would reply with a wicked grin, laugh wildly for
a moment and then suddenly lunge for the nearest bar and buy
an enormous round of drinks.

Evenings like this usually ended badly. Ford would get out of his
skull on whisky, huddle into a corner with some girl and explain
to her in slurred phrases that honestly the colour of the flying
saucers didn't matter that much really.

Thereafter, staggering semi-paralytic down the night streets he
would often ask passing policemen if they knew the way to
Betelgeuse. The policemen would usually say something like,
"Don't you think it's about time you went off home sir?"

"I'm trying to baby, I'm trying to," is what Ford invariably replied
on these occasions.

In fact what he was really looking out for when he stared
distractedly into the night sky was any kind of flying saucer at all.
The reason he said green was that green was the traditional space
livery of the Betelgeuse trading scouts.

Ford Prefect was desperate that any flying saucer at all would
arrive soon because fifteen years was a long time to get stranded
anywhere, particularly somewhere as mindboggingly dull as the
Earth.
                      14 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Ford wished that a flying saucer would arrive soon because he
knew how to flag flying saucers down and get lifts from them.
He knew how to see the Marvels of the Universe for less than
thirty Altairan dollars a day.

In fact, Ford Prefect was a roving researcher for that wholly
remarkable book The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy.

Human beings are great adaptors, and by lunchtime life in the
environs of Arthur's house had settled into a steady routine. It
was Arthur's accepted role to lie squelching in the mud making
occasional demands to see his lawyer, his mother or a good book;
it was Mr Prosser's accepted role to tackle Arthur with the
occasional new ploy such as the For the Public Good talk, the
March of Progress talk, the They Knocked My House Down
Once You Know, Never Looked Back talk and various other
cajoleries and threats; and it was the bulldozer drivers' accepted
role to sit around drinking coffee and experimenting with union
regulations to see how they could turn the situation to their
financial advantage.

The Earth moved slowly in its diurnal course.

The sun was beginning to dry out the mud Arthur lay in.

A shadow moved across him again.

"Hello Arthur," said the shadow. Arthur looked up and squinting
into the sun was startled to see Ford Prefect standing above him.

"Ford! Hello, how are you?"

"Fine," said Ford, "look, are you busy?"
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          15

"Am I busy?" exclaimed Arthur. "Well, I've just got all these
bulldozers and things to lie in front of because they'll knock my
house down if I don't, but other than that ... well, no not
especially, why?"

They don't have sarcasm on Betelgeuse, and Ford Prefect often
failed to notice it unless he was concentrating. He said, "Good, is
there anywhere we can talk?"

"What?" said Arthur Dent.

For a few seconds Ford seemed to ignore him, and stared fixedly
into the sky like a rabbit trying to get run over by a car. Then
suddenly he squatted down beside Arthur.

"We've got to talk," he said urgently.

"Fine," said Arthur, "talk."

"And drink," said Ford. "It's vitally important that we talk and
drink. Now. We'll go to the pub in the village."

He looked into the sky again, nervous, expectant.

"Look, don't you understand?" shouted Arthur. He pointed at
Prosser. "That man wants to knock my house down!"

Ford glanced at him, puzzled.

"Well he can do it while you're away can't he?" he asked.

"But I don't want him to!"

"Ah."

"Look, what's the matter with you Ford?" said Arthur.
                       16 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Nothing. Nothing's the matter. Listen to me - I've got to tell
you the most important thing you've ever heard. I've got to tell
you now, and I've got to tell you in the saloon bar of the Horse
and Groom."

"But why?"

"Because you are going to need a very stiff drink."

Ford stared at Arthur, and Arthur was astonished to find that his
will was beginning to weaken. He didn't realize that this was
because of an old drinking game that Ford learned to play in the
hyperspace ports that served the madranite mining belts in the
star system of Orion Beta. The game was not unlike the Earth
game called Indian Wrestling, and was played like this:

Two contestants would sit either side of a table, with a glass in
front of each of them.

Between them would be placed a bottle of Janx Spirit (as
immortalized in that ancient Orion mining song "Oh don't give
me none more of that Old Janx Spirit/ No, don't you give me
none more of that Old Janx Spirit/ For my head will fly, my
tongue will lie, my eyes will fry and I may die/ Won't you pour
me one more of that sinful Old Janx Spirit").

Each of the two contestants would then concentrate their will on
the bottle and attempt to tip it and pour spirit into the glass of his
opponent - who would then have to drink it.

The bottle would then be refilled. The game would be played
again. And again.

Once you started to lose you would probably keep losing, because
one of the effects of Janx spirit is to depress telepsychic power.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          17

As soon as a predetermined quantity had been consumed, the
final loser would have to perform a forfeit, which was usually
obscenely biological.

Ford Prefect usually played to lose.

Ford stared at Arthur, who began to think that perhaps he did
want to go to the Horse and Groom after all.

"But what about my house ...?" he asked plaintively.

Ford looked across to Mr Prosser, and suddenly a wicked
thought struck him.

"He wants to knock your house down?"

"Yes, he wants to build ..."

"And he can't because you're lying in front of the bulldozers?"

"Yes, and ..."

"I'm sure we can come to some arrangement," said Ford. "Excuse
me!" he shouted.

Mr Prosser (who was arguing with a spokesman for the bulldozer
drivers about whether or not Arthur Dent constituted a mental
health hazard, and how much they should get paid if he did)
looked around. He was surprised and slightly alarmed to find
that Arthur had company.

"Yes? Hello?" he called. "Has Mr Dent come to his senses yet?"

"Can we for the moment," called Ford, "assume that he hasn't?"
"Well?" sighed Mr Prosser.
                       18 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"And can we also assume," said Ford, "that he's going to be
staying here all day?"

"So?"

"So all your men are going to be standing around all day doing
nothing?"

"Could be, could be ..."

"Well, if you're resigned to doing that anyway, you don't actually
need him to lie here all the time do you?"

"What?"

"You don't," said Ford patiently, "actually need him here."

Mr Prosser thought about this.

"Well no, not as such...", he said, "not exactly need ..." Prosser was
worried. He thought that one of them wasn't making a lot of
sense.

Ford said, "So if you would just like to take it as read that he's
actually here, then he and I could slip off down to the pub for
half an hour. How does that sound?"

Mr Prosser thought it sounded perfectly potty.

"That sounds perfectly reasonable," he said in a reassuring tone
of voice, wondering who he was trying to reassure.

"And if you want to pop off for a quick one yourself later on," said
Ford, "we can always cover up for you in return."
         THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           19

"Thank you very much," said Mr Prosser who no longer knew
how to play this at all, "thank you very much, yes, that's very kind
..." He frowned, then smiled, then tried to do both at once, failed,
grasped hold of his fur hat and rolled it fitfully round the top of
his head. He could only assume that he had just won.

"So," continued Ford Prefect, "if you would just like to come over
here and lie down ..."

"What?" said Mr Prosser.

"Ah, I'm sorry," said Ford, "perhaps I hadn't made myself fully
clear. Somebody's got to lie in front of the bulldozers haven't
they? Or there won't be anything to stop them driving into Mr
Dent's house will there?"

"What?" said Mr Prosser again.

"It's very simple," said Ford, "my client, Mr Dent, says that he will
stop lying here in the mud on the sole condition that you come
and take over from him." "What are you talking about?" said
Arthur, but Ford nudged him with his shoe to be quiet.

"You want me," said Mr Prosser, spelling out this new thought to
himself, "to come and lie there ..."

"Yes."

"In front of the bulldozer?"

"Yes."

"Instead of Mr Dent."

"Yes."
                        20 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"In the mud."

"In, as you say it, the mud."

As soon as Mr Prosser realized that he was substantially the loser
after all, it was as if a weight lifted itself off his shoulders: this was
more like the world as he knew it. He sighed.

"In return for which you will take Mr Dent with you down to the
pub?"

"That's it," said Ford. "That's it exactly."

Mr Prosser took a few nervous steps forward and stopped.

"Promise?"

"Promise," said Ford. He turned to Arthur.

"Come on," he said to him, "get up and let the man lie down."

Arthur stood up, feeling as if he was in a dream.

Ford beckoned to Prosser who sadly, awkwardly, sat down in the
mud. He felt that his whole life was some kind of dream and he
sometimes wondered whose it was and whether they were
enjoying it. The mud folded itself round his bottom and his arms
and oozed into his shoes.

Ford looked at him severely.

"And no sneaky knocking down Mr Dent's house whilst he's away,
alright?" he said.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          21

"The mere thought," growled Mr Prosser, "hadn't even begun to
speculate," he continued, settling himself back, "about the merest
possibility of crossing my mind."

He saw the bulldozer driver's union representative approaching
and let his head sink back and closed his eyes. He was trying to
marshal his arguments for proving that he did not now constitute
a mental health hazard himself. He was far from certain about
this - his mind seemed to be full of noise, horses, smoke, and the
stench of blood. This always happened when he felt miserable
and put upon, and he had never been able to explain it to
himself. In a high dimension of which we know nothing the
mighty Khan bellowed with rage, but Mr Prosser only trembled
slightly and whimpered. He began to fell little pricks of water
behind the eyelids. Bureaucratic cock-ups, angry men lying in
the mud, indecipherable strangers handing out inexplicable
humiliations and an unidentified army of horsemen laughing at
him in his head - what a day.

What a day. Ford Prefect knew that it didn't matter a pair of
dingo's kidneys whether Arthur's house got knocked down or not
now.

Arthur remained very worried.

"But can we trust him?" he said.

"Myself I'd trust him to the end of the Earth," said Ford.

"Oh yes," said Arthur, "and how far's that?"

"About twelve minutes away," said Ford, "come on, I need a
drink."
                       22 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Here's what the Encyclopedia Galactica has to say about alcohol.
It says that alcohol is a colourless volatile liquid formed by the
fermentation of sugars and also notes its intoxicating effect on
certain carbon-based life forms.

The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy also mentions alcohol. It
says that the best drink in existence is the Pan Galactic Gargle
Blaster.

It says that the effect of a Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster is like
having your brains smashed out by a slice of lemon wrapped
round a large gold brick.

The Guide also tells you on which planets the best Pan Galactic
Gargle Blasters are mixed, how much you can expect to pay for
one and what voluntary organizations exist to help you
rehabilitate afterwards.

The Guide even tells you how you can mix one yourself.

Take the juice from one bottle of that Ol' Janx Spirit, it says.

Pour into it one measure of water from the seas of Santraginus V
- Oh that Santraginean sea water, it says. Oh those Santraginean
fish!!!

Allow three cubes of Arcturan Mega-gin to melt into the mixture
(it must be properly iced or the benzine is lost).

Allow four litres of Fallian marsh gas to bubble through it, in
memory of all those happy Hikers who have died of pleasure in
the Marshes of Fallia.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          23

Over the back of a silver spoon float a measure of Qualactin
Hypermint extract, redolent of all the heady odours of the dark
Qualactin Zones, subtle sweet and mystic.

Drop in the tooth of an Algolian Suntiger. Watch it dissolve,
spreading the fires of the Algolian Suns deep into the heart of the
drink.

Sprinkle Zamphuor.

Add an olive.

Drink ... but ... very carefully ...

The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy sells rather better than
the Encyclopedia Galactica.

"Six pints of bitter," said Ford Prefect to the barman of the Horse
and Groom. "And quickly please, the world's about to end."

The barman of the Horse and Groom didn't deserve this sort of
treatment, he was a dignified old man. He pushed his glasses up
his nose and blinked at Ford Prefect. Ford ignored him and
stared out of the window, so the barman looked instead at Arthur
who shrugged helplessly and said nothing.

So the barman said, "Oh yes sir? Nice weather for it," and started
pulling pints.

He tried again.

"Going to watch the match this afternoon then?"

Ford glanced round at him.

"No, no point," he said, and looked back out of the window.
                       24 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"What's that, foregone conclusion then you reckon sir?" said the
barman. "Arsenal without a chance?"

"No, no," said Ford, "it's just that the world's about to end."

"Oh yes sir, so you said," said the barman, looking over his glasses
this time at Arthur. "Lucky escape for Arsenal if it did."

Ford looked back at him, genuinely surprised.

"No, not really," he said. He frowned.

The barman breathed in heavily. "There you are sir, six pints,"
he said.

Arthur smiled at him wanly and shrugged again. He turned and
smiled wanly at the rest of the pub just in case any of them had
heard what was going on. None of them had, and none of them
could understand what he was smiling at them for.

A man sitting next to Ford at the bar looked at the two men,
looked at the six pints, did a swift burst of mental arithmetic,
arrived at an answer he liked and grinned a stupid hopeful grin
at them.

"Get off," said Ford, "They're ours," giving him a look that would
have an Algolian Suntiger get on with what it was doing.

Ford slapped a five-pound note on the bar. He said, "Keep the
change."

"What, from a fiver? Thank you sir." "You've got ten minutes left
to spend it."

The barman simply decided to walk away for a bit.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          25

"Ford," said Arthur, "would you please tell me what the hell is
going on?"

"Drink up," said Ford, "you've got three pints to get through."

"Three pints?" said Arthur. "At lunchtime?"

The man next to ford grinned and nodded happily. Ford
ignored him. He said, "Time is an illusion. Lunchtime doubly
so."

"Very deep," said Arthur, "you should send that in to the Reader's
Digest. They've got a page for people like you."

"Drink up."

"Why three pints all of a sudden?"

"Muscle relaxant, you'll need it."

"Muscle relaxant?"

"Muscle relaxant."

Arthur stared into his beer.

"Did I do anything wrong today," he said, "or has the world
always been like this and I've been too wrapped up in myself to
notice?"

"Alright," said Ford, "I'll try to explain. How long have we known
each other?"

"How long?" Arthur thought. "Er, about five years, maybe six,"
he said. "Most of it seemed to make some sense at the time."
                      26 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Alright," said Ford. "How would you react if I said that I'm not
from Guildford after all, but from a small planet somewhere in
the vicinity of Betelgeuse?" Arthur shrugged in a so-so sort of
way.

"I don't know," he said, taking a pull of beer. "Why - do you
think it's the sort of thing you're likely to say?"

Ford gave up. It really wasn't worth bothering at the moment,
what with the world being about to end. He just said:

"Drink up."

He added, perfectly factually:

"The world's about to end."

Arthur gave the rest of the pub another wan smile. The rest of
the pub frowned at him. A man waved at him to stop smiling at
them and mind his own business.

"This must be Thursday," said Arthur musing to himself, sinking
low over his beer, "I never could get the hang of Thursdays."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          27

On this particular Thursday, something was moving quietly
through the ionosphere many miles above the surface of the
planet; several somethings in fact, several dozen huge yellow
chunky slablike somethings, huge as office buildings, silent as
birds. They soared with ease, basking in electromagnetic rays
from the star Sol, biding their time, grouping, preparing.

The planet beneath them was almost perfectly oblivious of their
presence, which was just how they wanted it for the moment.
The huge yellow somethings went unnoticed at Goonhilly, they
passed over Cape Canaveral without a blip, Woomera and Jodrell
Bank looked straight through them - which was a pity because it
was exactly the sort of thing they'd been looking for all these
years.

The only place they registered at all was on a small black device
called a Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic which winked away quietly to
itself. It nestled in the darkness inside a leather satchel which
Ford Prefect wore habitually round his neck. The contents of
Ford Prefect's satchel were quite interesting in fact and would
have made any Earth physicist's eyes pop out of his head, which
is why he always concealed them by keeping a couple of dog-
eared scripts for plays he pretended he was auditioning for
stuffed in the top. Besides the Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic and the
scripts he had an Electronic Thumb - a short squat black rod,
smooth and matt with a couple of flat switches and dials at one
end; he also had a device which looked rather like a largish
electronic calculator. This had about a hundred tiny flat press
buttons and a screen about four inches square on which any one
of a million "pages" could be summoned at a moment's notice. It
looked insanely complicated, and this was one of the reasons why
the snug plastic cover it fitted into had the words Don't Panic
printed on it in large friendly letters. The other reason was that
                       28 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

this device was in fact that most remarkable of all books ever to
come out of the great publishing corporations of Ursa Minor -
The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy. The reason why it was
published in the form of a micro sub meson electronic
component is that if it were printed in normal book form, an
interstellar hitch hiker would require several inconveniently
large buildings to carry it around in.

Beneath that in Ford Prefect's satchel were a few biros, a
notepad, and a largish bath towel from Marks and Spencer.

The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy has a few things to say on
the subject of towels.

A towel, it says, is about the most massively useful thing an
interstellar hitch hiker can have. Partly it has great practical
value - you can wrap it around you for warmth as you bound
across the cold moons of Jaglan Beta; you can lie on it on the
brilliant marble-sanded beaches of Santraginus V, inhaling the
heady sea vapours; you can sleep under it beneath the stars
which shine so redly on the desert world of Kakrafoon; use it to
sail a mini raft down the slow heavy river Moth; wet it for use in
hand-to- hand-combat; wrap it round your head to ward off
noxious fumes or to avoid the gaze of the Ravenous Bugblatter
Beast of Traal (a mindboggingly stupid animal, it assumes that if
you can't see it, it can't see you - daft as a bush, but very
ravenous); you can wave your towel in emergencies as a distress
signal, and of course dry yourself off with it if it still seems to be
clean enough.

More importantly, a towel has immense psychological value. For
some reason, if a strag (strag: non-hitch hiker) discovers that a
hitch hiker has his towel with him, he will automatically assume
that he is also in possession of a toothbrush, face flannel, soap, tin
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          29

of biscuits, flask, compass, map, ball of string, gnat spray, wet
weather gear, space suit etc., etc. Furthermore, the strag will
then happily lend the hitch hiker any of these or a dozen other
items that the hitch hiker might accidentally have "lost". What
the strag will think is that any man who can hitch the length and
breadth of the galaxy, rough it, slum it, struggle against terrible
odds, win through, and still knows where his towel is is clearly a
man to be reckoned with.

Hence a phrase which has passed into hitch hiking slang, as in
"Hey, you sass that hoopy Ford Prefect? There's a frood who
really knows where his towel is." (Sass: know, be aware of, meet,
have sex with; hoopy: really together guy; frood: really amazingly
together guy.)

Nestling quietly on top of the towel in Ford Prefect's satchel, the
Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic began to wink more quickly. Miles above
the surface of the planet the huge yellow somethings began to fan
out. At Jodrell Bank, someone decided it was time for a nice
relaxing cup of tea.

"You got a towel with you?" said Ford Prefect suddenly to Arthur.

Arthur, struggling through his third pint, looked round at him.

"Why? What, no ... should I have?" He had given up being
surprised, there didn't seem to be any point any longer.

Ford clicked his tongue in irritation.

"Drink up," he urged.

At that moment the dull sound of a rumbling crash from outside
filtered through the low murmur of the pub, through the sound
                      30 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

of the jukebox, through the sound of the man next to Ford
hiccupping over the whisky Ford had eventually bought him.

Arthur choked on his beer, leapt to his feet.

"What's that?" he yelped.

"Don't worry," said Ford, "they haven't started yet."

"Thank God for that," said Arthur and relaxed.

"It's probably just your house being knocked down," said Ford,
drowning his last pint.

"What?" shouted Arthur. Suddenly Ford's spell was broken.
Arthur looked wildly around him and ran to the window.

"My God they are! They're knocking my house down. What the
hell am I doing in the pub, Ford?"

"It hardly makes any difference at this stage," said Ford, "let them
have their fun."

"Fun?" yelped Arthur. "Fun!" He quickly checked out of the
window again that they were talking about the same thing.

"Damn their fun!" he hooted and ran out of the pub furiously
waving a nearly empty beer glass. He made no friends at all in
the pub that lunchtime.

"Stop, you vandals! You home wreckers!" bawled Arthur. "You
half crazed Visigoths, stop will you!"

Ford would have to go after him. Turning quickly to the barman
he asked for four packets of peanuts.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           31

"There you are sir," said the barman, slapping the packets on the
bar, "twenty-eight pence if you'd be so kind."

Ford was very kind - he gave the barman another five-pound
note and told him to keep the change. The barman looked at it
and then looked at Ford. He suddenly shivered: he experienced
a momentary sensation that he didn't understand because no one
on Earth had ever experienced it before. In moments of great
stress, every life form that exists gives out a tiny sublimal signal.
This signal simply communicates an exact and almost pathetic
sense of how far that being is from the place of his birth. On
Earth it is never possible to be further than sixteen thousand
miles from your birthplace, which really isn't very far, so such
signals are too minute to be noticed. Ford Prefect was at this
moment under great stress, and he was born 600 light years away
in the near vicinity of Betelgeuse.

The barman reeled for a moment, hit by a shocking,
incomprehensible sense of distance. He didn't know what it
meant, but he looked at Ford Prefect with a new sense of respect,
almost awe.

"Are you serious, sir?" he said in a small whisper which had the
effect of silencing the pub. "You think the world's going to end?"

"Yes," said Ford.

"But, this afternoon?"

Ford had recovered himself. He was at his flippest.

"Yes," he said gaily, "in less than two minutes I would estimate."

The barman couldn't believe the conversation he was having, but
he couldn't believe the sensation he had just had either.
                       32 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Isn't there anything we can do about it then?" he said.

"No, nothing," said Ford, stuffing the peanuts into his pockets.

Someone in the hushed bar suddenly laughed raucously at how
stupid everyone had become.

The man sitting next to Ford was a bit sozzled by now. His eyes
waved their way up to Ford.

"I thought," he said, "that if the world was going to end we were
meant to lie down or put a paper bag over our head or
something."

"If you like, yes," said Ford.

"That's what they told us in the army," said the man, and his eyes
began the long trek back down to his whisky.

"Will that help?" asked the barman.

"No," said Ford and gave him a friendly smile. "Excuse me," he
said, "I've got to go." With a wave, he left.

The pub was silent for a moment longer, and then,
embarrassingly enough, the man with the raucous laugh did it
again. The girl he had dragged along to the pub with him had
grown to loathe him dearly over the last hour or so, and it would
probably have been a great satisfaction to her to know that in a
minute and a half or so he would suddenly evaporate into a whiff
of hydrogen, ozone and carbon monoxide. However, when the
moment came she would be too busy evaporating herself to
notice it.

The barman cleared his throat. He heard himself say:
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           33

"Last orders, please." The huge yellow machines began to sink
downward and to move faster.

Ford knew they were there. This wasn't the way he had wanted
it.

Running up the lane, Arthur had nearly reached his house. He
didn't notice how cold it had suddenly become, he didn't notice
the wind, he didn't notice the sudden irrational squall of rain.
He didn't notice anything but the caterpillar bulldozers crawling
over the rubble that had been his home.

"You barbarians!" he yelled. "I'll sue the council for every penny
it's got! I'll have you hung, drawn and quartered! And whipped!
And boiled ... until ... until ... until you've had enough."

Ford was running after him very fast. Very very fast.

"And then I'll do it again!" yelled Arthur. "And when I've finished
I will take all the little bits, and I will jump on them!"

Arthur didn't notice that the men were running from the
bulldozers; he didn't notice that Mr Prosser was staring hectically
into the sky. What Mr Prosser had noticed was that huge yellow
somethings were screaming through the clouds. Impossibly huge
yellow somethings.

"And I will carry on jumping on them," yelled Arthur, still
running, "until I get blisters, or I can think of anything even
more unpleasant to do, and then ..."

Arthur tripped, and fell headlong, rolled and landed flat on his
back. At last he noticed that something was going on. His finger
shot upwards.
                      34 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"What the hell's that?" he shrieked.

Whatever it was raced across the sky in monstrous yellowness,
tore the sky apart with mind-buggering noise and leapt off into
the distance leaving the gaping air to shut behind it with a bang
that drove your ears six feet into your skull.

Another one followed and did the same thing only louder.

It's difficult to say exactly what the people on the surface of the
planet were doing now, because they didn't really know what
they were doing themselves. None of it made a lot of sense -
running into houses, running out of houses, howling noiselessly
at the noise. All around the world city streets exploded with
people, cars slewed into each other as the noise fell on them and
then rolled off like a tidal wave over hills and valleys, deserts and
oceans, seeming to flatten everything it hit.

Only one man stood and watched the sky, stood with terrible
sadness in his eyes and rubber bungs in his ears. He knew
exactly what was happening and had known ever since his Sub-
Etha Sens-O- Matic had started winking in the dead of night
beside his pillar and woken him with a start. It was what he had
waited for all these years, but when he had deciphered the signal
pattern sitting alone in his small dark room a coldness had
gripped him and squeezed his heart. Of all the races in all of the
Galaxy who could have come and said a big hello to planet Earth,
he thought, didn't it just have to be the Vogons.

Still he knew what he had to do. As the Vogon craft screamed
through the air high above him he opened his satchel. He threw
away a copy of Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat,
he threw away a copy of Godspell: He wouldn't need them where
he was going. Everything was ready, everything was prepared.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          35

He knew where his towel was.

A sudden silence hit the Earth. If anything it was worse than the
noise. For a while nothing happened.

The great ships hung motionless in the air, over every nation on
Earth. Motionless they hung, huge, heavy, steady in the sky, a
blasphemy against nature. Many people went straight into shock
as their minds tried to encompass what they were looking at.
The ships hung in the sky in much the same way that bricks
don't.

And still nothing happened.

Then there was a slight whisper, a sudden spacious whisper of
open ambient sound. Every hi fi set in the world, every radio,
every television, every cassette recorder, every woofer, every
tweeter, every mid-range driver in the world quietly turned itself
on.

Every tin can, every dust bin, every window, every car, every
wine glass, every sheet of rusty metal became activated as an
acoustically perfect sounding board.

Before the Earth passed away it was going to be treated to the
very ultimate in sound reproduction, the greatest public address
system ever built. But there was no concert, no music, no
fanfare, just a simple message.

"People of Earth, your attention please," a voice said, and it was
wonderful.      Wonderful perfect quadrophonic sound with
distortion levels so low as to make a brave man weep.

"This is Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz of the Galactic Hyperspace
Planning Council," the voice continued. "As you will no doubt be
                      36 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

aware, the plans for development of the outlying regions of the
Galaxy require the building of a hyperspatial express route
through your star system, and regrettably your planet is one of
those scheduled for demolition. The process will take slightly less
that two of your Earth minutes. Thank you."

The PA died away.

Uncomprehending terror settled on the watching people of
Earth. The terror moved slowly through the gathered crowds as
if they were iron fillings on a sheet of board and a magnet was
moving beneath them. Panic sprouted again, desperate fleeing
panic, but there was nowhere to flee to. Observing this, the
Vogons turned on their PA again. It said:

"There's no point in acting all surprised about it. All the
planning charts and demolition orders have been on display in
your local planning department on Alpha Centauri for fifty of
your Earth years, so you've had plenty of time to lodge any
formal complaint and it's far too late to start making a fuss about
it now."

The PA fell silent again and its echo drifted off across the land.
The huge ships turned slowly in the sky with easy power. On the
underside of each a hatchway opened, an empty black space.

By this time somebody somewhere must have manned a radio
transmitter, located a wavelength and broadcasted a message
back to the Vogon ships, to plead on behalf of the planet.
Nobody ever heard what they said, they only heard the reply.
The PA slammed back into life again. The voice was annoyed. It
said:
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           37

"What do you mean you've never been to Alpha Centauri? For
heaven's sake mankind, it's only four light years away you know.
I'm sorry, but if you can't be bothered to take an interest in local
affairs that's your own lookout.

"Energize the demolition beams."

Light poured out into the hatchways.

"I don't know," said the voice on the PA, "apathetic bloody planet,
I've no sympathy at all." It cut off.

There was a terrible ghastly silence.

There was a terrible ghastly noise.

There was a terrible ghastly silence.

The Vogon Constructor fleet coasted away into the inky starry
void.
                     38 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Far away on the opposite spiral arm of the Galaxy, five hundred
thousand light years from the star Sol, Zaphod Beeblebrox,
President of the Imperial Galactic Government, sped across the
seas of Damogran, his ion drive delta boat winking and flashing
in the Damogran sun.

Damogran the hot; Damogran the remote; Damogran the almost
totally unheard of.

Damogran, secret home of the Heart of Gold.

The boat sped on across the water. It would be some time before
it reached its destination because Damogran is such an
inconveniently arranged planet. It consists of nothing but
middling to large desert islands separated by very pretty but
annoyingly wide stretches of ocean.

The boat sped on.

Because of this topological awkwardness Damogran has always
remained a deserted planet. This is why the Imperial Galactic
Government chose Damogran for the Heart of Gold project,
because it was so deserted and the Heart of Gold was so secret.

The boat zipped and skipped across the sea, the sea that lay
between the main islands of the only archipelago of any useful
size on the whole planet. Zaphod Beeblebrox was on his way
from the tiny spaceport on Easter Island (the name was an
entirely meaningless coincidence - in Galacticspeke, easter means
small flat and light brown) to the Heart of Gold island, which by
another meaningless coincidence was called France.

One of the side effects of work on the Heart of Gold was a whole
string of pretty meaningless coincidences.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          39

But it was not in any way a coincidence that today, the day of
culmination of the project, the great day of unveiling, the day
that the Heart of Gold was finally to be introduced to a
marvelling Galaxy, was also a great day of culmination for
Zaphod Beeblebrox. It was for the sake of this day that he had
first decided to run for the Presidency, a decision which had sent
waves of astonishment throughout the Imperial Galaxy - Zaphod
Beeblebrox? President? Not the Zaphod Beeblebrox? Not the
President? Many had seen it as a clinching proof that the whole
of known creation had finally gone bananas.

Zaphod grinned and gave the boat an extra kick of speed.

Zaphod Beeblebrox, adventurer, ex-hippy, good timer, (crook?
quite possibly), manic self-publicist, terribly bad at personal
relationships, often thought to be completely out to lunch.

President?

No one had gone bananas, not in that way at least.

Only six people in the entire Galaxy understood the principle on
which the Galaxy was governed, and they knew that once
Zaphod Beeblebrox had announced his intention to run as
President it was more or less a fait accompli: he was the ideal
Presidency fodder*.

What they completely failed to understand was why Zaphod was
doing it.

He banked sharply, shooting a wild wall of water at the sun.

Today was the day; today was the day when they would realize
what Zaphod had been up to. Today was what Zaphod
Beeblebrox's Presidency was all about. Today was also his two
                      40 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

hundredth birthday, but that was just another meaningless
coincidence.

As he skipped his boat across the seas of Damogran he smiled
quietly to himself about what a wonderful exciting day it was
going to be. He relaxed and spread his two arms lazily across the
seat back. He steered with an extra arm he'd recently fitted just
beneath his right one to help improve his ski-boxing.

"Hey," he cooed to himself, "you're a real cool boy you." But his
nerves sang a song shriller than a dog whistle.

The island of France was about twenty miles long, five miles
across the middle, sandy and crescent shaped. In fact it seemed
to exist not so much as an island in its own right as simply a
means of defining the sweep and curve of a huge bay. This
impression was heightened by the fact that the inner coastline of
the crescent consisted almost entirely of steep cliffs. From the
top of the cliff the land sloped slowly down five miles to the
opposite shore.

On top of the cliffs stood a reception committee.

It consisted in large part of the engineers and researchers who
had built the Heart of Gold - mostly humanoid, but here and
there were a few reptiloid atomineers, two or three green slyph-
like maximegalacticans, an octopoid physucturalist or two and a
Hooloovoo (a Hooloovoo is a super-intelligent shade of the color
blue). All except the Hooloovoo were resplendent in their multi-
colored ceremonial lab coats; the Hooloovoo had been
temporarily refracted into a free standing prism for the occasion.

There was a mood of immense excitement thrilling through all of
them. Together and between them they had gone to and beyond
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /             41

the furthest limits of physical laws, restructured the fundamental
fabric of matter, strained, twisted and broken the laws of
possibility and impossibility, but still the greatest excitement of all
seemed to be to meet a man with an orange sash round his neck.
(An orange sash was what the President of the Galaxy
traditionally wore.) It might not even have made much difference
to them if they'd known exactly how much power the President
of the Galaxy actually wielded: none at all. Only six people in the
Galaxy knew that the job of the Galactic President was not to
wield power but to attract attention away from it.

Zaphod Beeblebrox was amazingly good at his job.

The crowd gasped, dazzled by sun and seemanship, as the
Presidential speedboat zipped round the headland into the bay.
It flashed and shone as it came skating over the sea in wide
skidding turns.

In fact it didn't need to touch the water at all, because it was
supported on a hazy cushion of ionized atoms - but just for effect
it was fitted with thin finblades which could be lowered into the
water. They slashed sheets of water hissing into the air, carved
deep gashes into the sea which swayed crazily and sank back
foaming into the boat's wake as it careered across the bay.

Zaphod loved effect: it was what he was best at.

He twisted the wheel sharply, the boat slewed round in a wild
scything skid beneath the cliff face and dropped to rest lightly on
the rocking waves.

Within seconds he ran out onto the deck and waved and grinned
at over three billion people. The three billion people weren't
actually there, but they watched his every gesture through the
                      42 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

eyes of a small robot tri-D camera which hovered obsequiously in
the air nearby. The antics of the President always made
amazingly popular tri-D; that's what they were for.

He grinned again. Three billion and six people didn't know it,
but today would be a bigger antic than anyone had bargained
for.

The robot camera homed in for a close up on the more popular
of his two heads and he waved again. He was roughly humanoid
in appearance except for the extra head and third arm. His fair
tousled hair stuck out in random directions, his blue eyes glinted
with something completely unidentifiable, and his chins were
almost always unshaven.

A twenty-foot-high transparent globe floated next to his boat,
rolling and bobbing, glistening in the brilliant sun. Inside it
floated a wide semi-circular sofa upholstered in glorious red
leather: the more the globe bobbed and rolled, the more the sofa
stayed perfectly still, steady as an upholstered rock. Again, all
done for effect as much as anything.

Zaphod stepped through the wall of the globe and relaxed on the
sofa. He spread his two arms lazily along the back and with the
third brushed some dust off his knee. His heads looked about,
smiling; he put his feet up. At any moment, he thought, he
might scream.

Water boiled up beneath the bubble, it seethed and spouted.
The bubble surged into the air, bobbing and rolling on the water
spout. Up, up it climbed, throwing stilts of light at the cliff. Up
it surged on the jet, the water falling from beneath it, crashing
back into the sea hundreds of feet below.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         43

Zaphod smiled, picturing himself.

A thoroughly ridiculous form of transport, but a thoroughly
beautiful one.

At the top of the cliff the globe wavered for a moment, tipped on
to a railed ramp, rolled down it to a small concave platform and
riddled to a halt.

To tremendous applause Zaphod Beeblebrox stepped out of the
bubble, his orange sash blazing in the light.

The President of the Galaxy had arrived.

He waited for the applause to die down, then raised his hands in
greeting.

"Hi," he said.

A government spider sidled up to him and attempted to press a
copy of his prepared speech into his hands. Pages three to seven
of the original version were at the moment floating soggily on the
Damogran sea some five miles out from the bay. Pages one and
two had been salvaged by a Damogran Frond Crested Eagle and
had already become incorporated into an extraordinary new
form of nest which the eagle had invented. It was constructed
largely of papier m@ch@ and it was virtually impossible for a
newly hatched baby eagle to break out of it. The Damogran
Frond Crested Eagle had heard of the notion of survival of the
species but wanted no truck with it.

Zaphod Beeblebrox would not be needing his set speech and he
gently deflected the one being offered him by the spider.

"Hi," he said again.
                      44 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Everyone beamed at him, or, at least, nearly everyone. He
singled out Trillian from the crowd. Trillian was a gird that
Zaphod had picked up recently whilst visiting a planet, just for
fun, incognito. She was slim, darkish, humanoid, with long
waves of black hair, a full mouth, an odd little nob of a nose and
ridiculously brown eyes. With her red head scarf knotted in that
particular way and her long flowing silky brown dress she looked
vaguely Arabic. Not that anyone there had ever heard of an Arab
of course. The Arabs had very recently ceased to exist, and even
when they had existed they were five hundred thousand light
years from Damogran. Trillian wasn't anybody in particular, or
so Zaphod claimed. She just went around with him rather a lot
and told him what she thought of him.

"Hi honey," he said to her.

She flashed him a quick tight smile and looked away. Then she
looked back for a moment and smiled more warmly - but by this
time he was looking at something else.

"Hi," he said to a small knot of creatures from the press who were
standing nearby wishing that he would stop saying Hi and get on
with the quotes. He grinned at them particularly because he
knew that in a few moments he would be giving them one hell of
a quote.

The next thing he said though was not a lot of use to them. One
of the officials of the party had irritably decided that the
President was clearly not in a mood to read the deliciously turned
speech that had been written for him, and had flipped the switch
on the remote control device in his pocket. Away in front of
them a huge white dome that bulged against the sky cracked
down in the middle, split, and slowly folded itself down into the
         THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /        45

ground. Everyone gasped although they had known perfectly
well it was going to do that because they had built it that way.

Beneath it lay uncovered a huge starship, one hundred and fifty
metres long, shaped like a sleek running shoe, perfectly white
and mindboggingly beautiful. At the heart of it, unseen, lay a
small gold box which carried within it the most brain-wretching
device ever conceived, a device which made this starship unique
in the history of the galaxy, a device after which the ship had
been named - The Heart of Gold. "Wow", said Zaphod
Beeblebrox to the Heart of Gold. There wasn't much else he
could say.

He said it again because he knew it would annoy the press.

"Wow."

The crowd turned their faces back towards him expectantly. He
winked at Trillian who raised her eyebrows and widened her
eyes at him. She knew what he was about to say and thought him
a terrible showoff.

"That is really amazing," he said. "That really is truly amazing.
That is so amazingly amazing I think I'd like to steal it."

A marvellous Presidential quote, absolutely true to form. The
crowd laughed appreciatively, the newsmen gleefully punched
buttons on their Sub-Etha News-Matics and the President
grinned.

As he grinned his heart screamed unbearably and he fingered
the small Paralyso-Matic bomb that nestled quietly in his pocket.

Finally he could bear it no more. He lifted his heads up to the
sky, let out a wild whoop in major thirds, threw the bomb to the
                  46 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

ground and ran forward through the sea of suddenly frozen
smiles.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           47

Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was not a pleasant sight, even for other
Vogons. His highly domed nose rose high above a small piggy
forehead. His dark green rubbery skin was thick enough for him
to play the game of Vogon Civil Service politics, and play it well,
and waterproof enough for him to survive indefinitely at sea
depths of up to a thousand feet with no ill effects.

Not that he ever went swimming of course. His busy schedule
would not allow it. He was the way he was because billions of
years ago when the Vogons had first crawled out of the sluggish
primeval seas of Vogsphere, and had lain panting and heaving
on the planet's virgin shores... when the first rays of the bright
young Vogsol sun had shone across them that morning, it was as
if the forces of evolution ad simply given up on them there and
then, had turned aside in disgust and written them off as an ugly
and unfortunate mistake. They never evolved again; they should
never have survived.

The fact that they did is some kind of tribute to the thick- willed
slug-brained stubbornness of these creatures. Evolution? they
said to themselves, Who needs it?, and what nature refused to do
for them they simply did without until such time as they were
able to rectify the grosser anatomical inconveniences with
surgery.

Meanwhile, the natural forces on the planet Vogsphere had been
working overtime to make up for their earlier blunder. They
brought forth scintillating jewelled scuttling crabs, which the
Vogons ate, smashing their shells with iron mallets; tall aspiring
trees with breathtaking slenderness and colour which the Vogons
cut down and burned the crab meat with; elegant gazelle- like
creatures with silken coats and dewy eyes which the Vogons
would catch and sit on. They were no use as transport because
                      48 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

their backs would snap instantly, but the Vogons sat on them
anyway.

Thus the planet Vogsphere whiled away the unhappy millennia
until the Vogons suddenly discovered the principles of
interstellar travel. Within a few short Vog years every last Vogon
had migrated to the Megabrantis cluster, the political hub of the
Galaxy and now formed the immensely powerful backbone of the
Galactic Civil Service. They have attempted to acquire learning,
they have attempted to acquire style and social grace, but in most
respects the modern Vogon is little different from his primitive
forebears.     Every year they import twenty-seven thousand
scintillating jewelled scuttling crabs from their native planet and
while away a happy drunken night smashing them to bits with
iron mallets.

Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was a fairly typical Vogon in that he was
thoroughly vile. Also, he did not like hitch hikers.

Somewhere in a small dark cabin buried deep in the intestines of
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz's flagship, a small match flared nervously.
The owner of the match was not a Vogon, but he knew all about
them and was right to be nervous. His name was Ford Prefect*.

He looked about the cabin but could see very little; strange
monstrous shadows loomed and leaped with the tiny flickering
flame, but all was quiet. He breathed a silent thank you to the
Dentrassis. The Dentrassis are an unruly tribe of gourmands, a
wild but pleasant bunch whom the Vogons had recently taken to
employing as catering staff on their long haul fleets, on the strict
understanding that they keep themselves very much to
themselves.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          49

This suited the Dentrassis fine, because they loved Vogon money,
which is one of the hardest currencies in space, but loathed the
Vogons themselves. The only sort of Vogon a Dentrassi liked to
see was an annoyed Vogon.

It was because of this tiny piece of information that Ford Prefect
was not now a whiff of hydrogen, ozone and carbon monoxide.

He heard a slight groan. By the light of the match he saw a
heavy shape moving slightly on the floor. Quickly he shook the
match out, reached in his pocket, found what he was looking for
and took it out. He crouched on the floor. The shape moved
again.

Ford Prefect said: "I bought some peanuts."

Arthur Dent moved, and groaned again, muttering incoherently.

"Here, have some," urged Ford, shaking the packet again, "if
you've never been through a matter transference beam before
you've probably lost some salt and protein. The beer you had
should have cushioned your system a bit." "Whhhrrrr..." said
Arthur Dent. He opened his eyes.

"It's dark," he said.

"Yes," said Ford Prefect, "it's dark."

"No light," said Arthur Dent. "Dark, no light."

One of the things Ford Prefect had always found hardest to
understand about human beings was their habit of continually
stating and repeating the obvious, as in It's a nice day, or You're
very tall, or Oh dear you seem to have fallen down a thirty-foot
well, are you alright? At first Ford had formed a theory to
                      50 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

account for this strange behaviour. If human beings don't keep
exercising their lips, he thought, their mouths probably seize up.
After a few months' consideration and observation he abandoned
this theory in favour of a new one. If they don't keep on
exercising their lips, he thought, their brains start working. After
a while he abandoned this one as well as being obstructively
cynical and decided he quite liked human beings after all, but he
always remained desperately worried about the terrible number
of things they didn't know about.

"Yes," he agreed with Arthur, "no light." He helped Arthur to
some peanuts. "How do you feel?" he asked.

"Like a military academy," said Arthur, "bits of me keep on
passing out."

Ford stared at him blankly in the darkness.

"If I asked you where the hell we were," said Arthur weakly,
"would I regret it?"

Ford stood up. "We're safe," he said.

"Oh good," said Arthur.

"We're in a small galley cabin," said Ford, "in one of the
spaceships of the Vogon Constructor Fleet."

"Ah," said Arthur, "this is obviously some strange usage of the
word safe that I wasn't previously aware of."

Ford struck another match to help him search for a light switch.
Monstrous shadows leaped and loomed again. Arthur struggled
to his feet and hugged himself apprehensively. Hideous alien
shapes seemed to throng about him, the air was thick with musty
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          51

smells which sidled into his lungs without identifying themselves,
and a low irritating hum kept his brain from focusing.

"How did we get here?" he asked, shivering slightly.

"We hitched a lift," said Ford.

"Excuse me?" said Arthur. "Are you trying to tell me that we just
stuck out our thumbs and some green bug-eyed monster stuck
his head out and said, Hi fellas, hop right in. I can take you as
far as the Basingstoke roundabout?"

"Well," said Ford, "the Thumb's an electronic sub-etha signalling
device, the roundabout's at Barnard's Star six light years away,
but otherwise, that's more or less right."

"And the bug-eyed monster?"

"Is green, yes."

"Fine," said Arthur, "when can I get home?"

"You can't," said Ford Prefect, and found the light switch.

"Shade your eyes ..." he said, and turned it on.

Even Ford was surprised.

"Good grief," said Arthur, "is this really the interior of a flying
saucer?"

Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz heaved his unpleasant green body round
the control bridge. He always felt vaguely irritable after
demolishing populated planets. He wished that someone would
come and tell him that it was all wrong so that he could shout at
them and feel better. He flopped as heavily as he could on to his
                          52 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

control seat in the hope that it would break and give him
something to be genuinely angry about, but it only gave a
complaining sort of creak.

"Go away!" he shouted at a young Vogon guard who entered the
bridge at that moment. The guard vanished immediately, feeling
rather relieved. He was glad it wouldn't now be him who
delivered the report they'd just received. The report was an
official release which said that a wonderful new form of spaceship
drive was at this moment being unveiled at a government
research base on Damogran which would henceforth make all
hyperspatial express routes unnecessary.

Another door slid open, but this time the Vogon captain didn't
shout because it was the door from the galley quarters where the
Dentrassis prepared his meals. A meal would be most welcome.

A huge furry creature bounded through the door with his lunch
tray. It was grinning like a maniac.

Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was delighted. He knew that when a
Dentrassi looked that pleased with itself there was something
going on somewhere on the ship that he could get very angry
indeed about.

Ford and Arthur stared about them.

"Well, what do you think?" said Ford.

"It's a bit squalid, isn't it?"

Ford frowned at the grubby mattress, unwashed cups and
unidentifiable bits of smelly alien underwear that lay around the
cramped cabin.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           53

"Well, this is a working ship, you see," said Ford. "These are the
Dentrassi sleeping quarters."

"I thought you said they were called Vogons or something."

"Yes," said Ford, "the Vogons run the ship, the Dentrassis are the
cooks, they let us on board."

"I'm confused," said Arthur.

"Here, have a look at this," said Ford. He sat down on one of the
mattresses and rummaged about in his satchel. Arthur prodded
the mattress nervously and then sat on it himself: in fact he had
very little to be nervous about, because all mattresses grown in
the swamps of Squornshellous Zeta are very thoroughly killed
and dried before being put to service. Very few have ever come
to life again.

Ford handed the book to Arthur.

"What is it?" asked Arthur.

"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. It's a sort of electronic
book. It tells you everything you need to know about anything.
That's its job."

Arthur turned it over nervously in his hands.

"I like the cover," he said. "Don't Panic. It's the first helpful or
intelligible thing anybody's said to me all day."

"I'll show you how it works," said Ford. He snatched it from
Arthur who was still holding it as if it was a two-week-dead lark
and pulled it out of its cover.
                        54 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"You press this button here you see and the screen lights up
giving you the index."

A screen, about three inches by four, lit up and characters began
to flicker across the surface.

"You want to know about Vogons, so I enter that name so." His
fingers tapped some more keys. "And there we are."

The words Vogon Constructor Fleets flared in green across the
screen.

Ford pressed a large red button at the bottom of the screen and
words began to undulate across it. At the same time, the book
began to speak the entry as well in a still quiet measured voice.
This is what the book said.

"Vogon Constructor Fleets. Here is what to do if you want to get
a lift from a Vogon: forget it. They are one of the most
unpleasant races in the Galaxy -- not actually evil, but bad
tempered, bureaucratic, officious and callous. They wouldn't
even lift a finger to save their own grandmothers from the
Ravenous Bugblatter Beast of Traal without orders signed in
triplicate, sent in, sent back, queried, lost, found, subjected to
public inquiry, lost again, and finally buried in soft peat and
recycled as firelighters.

"The best way to get a drink out of a Vogon is to stick your finger
down his throat, and the best way to irritate him is to feed his
grandmother to the Ravenous Bugblatter Beast of Traal.

"On no account allow a Vogon to read poetry at you."

Arthur blinked at it.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           55

"What a strange book. How did we get a lift then?"

"That's the point, it's out of date now," said Ford, sliding the book
back into its cover. "I'm doing the field research for the New
Revised Edition, and one of the things I'll have to include is a bit
about how the Vogons now employ Dentrassi cooks which gives
us a rather useful little loophole."

A pained expression crossed Arthur's face.       "But who are the
Dentrassi?" he said.

"Great guys," said Ford. "They're the best cooks and the best
drink mixers and they don't give a wet slap about anything else.
And they'll always help hitch hikers aboard, partly because they
like the company, but mostly because it annoys the Vogons.
Which is exactly the sort of thing you need to know if you're an
impoverished hitch hiker trying to see the marvels of the
Universe for less than thirty Altairan Dollars a day. And that's
my job. Fun, isn't it?"

Arthur looked lost.

"It's amazing," he said and frowned at one of the other
mattresses.

"Unfortunately I got stuck on the Earth for rather longer than I
intended," said Ford. "I came for a week and got stuck for fifteen
years."

"But how did you get there in the first place then?"

"Easy, I got a lift with a teaser."

"A teaser?"
                       56 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Yeah."

"Er, what is ..."

"A teaser? Teasers are usually rich kids with nothing to do. They
cruise around looking for planets which haven't made interstellar
contact yet and buzz them."

"Buzz them?" Arthur began to feel that Ford was enjoying
making life difficult for him. "Yeah", said Ford, "they buzz them.
They find some isolated spot with very few people around, then
land right by some poor soul whom no one's ever going to
believe and then strut up and down in front of him wearing silly
antennae on their heads and making beep beep noises. Rather
childish really." Ford leant back on the mattress with his hands
behind his head and looked infuriatingly pleased with himself.

"Ford," insisted Arthur, "I don't know if this sounds like a silly
question, but what am I doing here?"

"Well you know that," said Ford. "I rescued you from the Earth."

"And what's happened to the Earth?"

"Ah. It's been demolished."

"Has it," said Arthur levelly.

"Yes. It just boiled away into space."

"Look," said Arthur, "I'm a bit upset about that."

Ford frowned to himself and seemed to roll the thought around
his mind.

"Yes, I can understand that," he said at last.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          57

"Understand that!" shouted Arthur. "Understand that!"

Ford sprang up.

"Keep looking at the book!" he hissed urgently.

"What?"

"Don't Panic."

"I'm not panicking!"

"Yes you are."

"Alright so I'm panicking, what else is there to do?"

"You just come along with me and have a good time. The
Galaxy's a fun place. You'll need to have this fish in your ear."

"I beg your pardon?" asked Arthur, rather politely he thought.

Ford was holding up a small glass jar which quite clearly had a
small yellow fish wriggling around in it. Arthur blinked at him.
He wished there was something simple and recognizable he
could grasp hold of. He would have felt safe if alongside the
Dentrassi underwear, the piles of Squornshellous mattresses and
the man from Betelgeuse holding up a small yellow fish and
offering to put it in his ear he had been able to see just a small
packet of corn flakes. He couldn't, and he didn't feel safe.

Suddenly a violent noise leapt at them from no source that he
could identify. He gasped in terror at what sounded like a man
trying to gargle whilst fighting off a pack of wolves.

"Shush!" said Ford. "Listen, it might be important."
                      58 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Im ... important?"

"It's the Vogon captain making an announcement on the
T'annoy."

"You mean that's how the Vogons talk?"

"Listen!"

"But I can't speak Vogon!"

"You don't need to. Just put that fish in your ear."

Ford, with a lightning movement, clapped his hand to Arthur's
ear, and he had the sudden sickening sensation of the fish
slithering deep into his aural tract. Gasping with horror he
scrabbled at his ear for a second or so, but then slowly turned
goggle-eyed with wonder. He was experiencing the aural
equivalent of looking at a picture of two black silhouetted faces
and suddenly seeing it as a picture of a white candlestick. Or of
looking at a lot of coloured dots on a piece of paper which
suddenly resolve themselves into the figure six and mean that
your optician is going to charge you a lot of money for a new pair
of glasses.

He was still listening to the howling gargles, he knew that, only
now it had taken on the semblance of perfectly straightforward
English.

This is what he heard ...
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           59

"Howl howl gargle howl gargle howl howl howl gargle howl
gargle howl howl gargle gargle howl gargle gargle gargle howl
slurrp uuuurgh should have a good time. Message repeats. This
is your captain speaking, so stop whatever you're doing and pay
attention. First of all I see from our instruments that we have a
couple of hitchhikers aboard. Hello wherever you are. I just
want to make it totally clear that you are not at all welcome. I
worked hard to get where I am today, and I didn't become
captain of a Vogon constructor ship simply so I could turn it into
a taxi service for a load of degenerate freeloaders. I have sent
out a search party, and as soon that they find you I will put you
off the ship. If you're very lucky I might read you some of my
poetry first.

"Secondly, we are about to jump into hyperspace for the journey
to Barnard's Star. On arrival we will stay in dock for a seventy-
two hour refit, and no one's to leave the ship during that time. I
repeat, all planet leave is cancelled. I've just had an unhappy
love affair, so I don't see why anybody else should have a good
time. Message ends." The noise stopped.

Arthur discovered to his embarrassment that he was lying curled
up in a small ball on the floor with his arms wrapped round his
head. He smiled weakly.

"Charming man," he said. "I wish I had a daughter so I could
forbid her to marry one ..."

"You wouldn't need to," said Ford. "They've got as much sex
appeal as a road accident. No, don't move," he added as Arthur
began to uncurl himself, "you'd better be prepared for the jump
into hyperspace. It's unpleasantly like being drunk."

"What's so unpleasant about being drunk?"
                      60 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"You ask a glass of water."

Arthur thought about this.

"Ford," he said.

"Yeah?"

"What's this fish doing in my ear?"

"It's translating for you. It's a Babel fish. Look it up in the book
if you like."

He tossed over The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy and then
curled himself up into a foetal ball to prepare himself for the
jump.

At that moment the bottom fell out of Arthur's mind.

His eyes turned inside out. His feet began to leak out of the top
of his head.

The room folded flat about him, spun around, shifted out of
existence and left him sliding into his own navel.

They were passing through hyperspace.

"The Babel fish," said The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy
quietly, "is small, yellow and leech-like, and probably the oddest
thing in the Universe. It feeds on brainwave energy not from its
carrier but from those around it. It absorbs all unconscious
mental frequencies from this brainwave energy to nourish itself
with. It then excretes into the mind of its carrier a telepathic
matrix formed by combining the conscious thought frequencies
with nerve signals picked up from the speech centres of the brain
which has supplied them. The practical upshot of all this is that
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           61

if you stick a Babel fish in your ear you can instantly understand
anything said to you in any form of language. The speech
patterns you actually hear decode the brainwave matrix which
has been fed into your mind by your Babel fish.

"Now it is such a bizarrely improbable coincidence that anything
so mind\-bog\-gin\-gly useful could have evolved purely by
chance that some thin\-kers have chosen to see it as the final and
clinching proof of the non-existence of God.

"The argument goes something like this: `I refuse to prove that I
exist,' says God, `for proof denies faith, and without faith I am
nothing.'

"`But,' says Man, `The Babel fish is a dead giveaway, isn't it? It
could not have evolved by chance. It proves you exist, and so
therefore, by your own arguments, you don't. QED.'

"`Oh dear,' says God, `I hadn't thought of that,' and promptly
vanished in a puff of logic.

"`Oh, that was easy,' says Man, and for an encore goes on to
prove that black is white and gets himself killed on the next zebra
crossing.

"Most leading theologians claim that this argument is a load of
dingo's kidneys, but that didn't stop Oolon Colluphid making a
small fortune when he used it as the central theme of his best-
selling book Well That About Wraps It Up For God.

"Meanwhile, the poor Babel fish, by effectively removing all
barriers to communication between different races and cultures,
has caused more and bloddier wars than anything else in the
history of creation."
                       62 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Arthur let out a low groan. He was horrified to discover that the
kick through hyperspace hadn't killed him. He was now six light
years from the place that the Earth would have been if it still
existed.

The Earth.

Visions of it swam sickeningly through his nauseated mind.
There was no way his imagination could feel the impact of the
whole Earth having gone, it was too big. He prodded his feelings
by thinking that his parents and his sister had gone. No reaction.
He thought of all the people he had been close to. No reaction.
Then he thought of a complete stranger he had been standing
behind in the queue at the supermarket before and felt a sudden
stab - the supermarket was gone, everything in it was gone.
Nelson's Column had gone! Nelson's Column had gone and there
would be no outcry, because there was no one left to make an
outcry. From now on Nelson's Column only existed in his mind.
England only existed in his mind - his mind, stuck here in this
dank smelly steel-lined spaceship. A wave of claustrophobia
closed in on him.

England no longer existed. He'd got that - somehow he'd got it.
He tried again. America, he thought, has gone. He couldn't
grasp it. He decided to start smaller again. New York has gone.
No reaction. He'd never seriously believed it existed anyway.
The dollar, he thought, had sunk for ever. Slight tremor there.
Every Bogart movie has been wiped, he said to himself, and that
gave him a nasty knock. McDonalds, he thought. There is no
longer any such thing as a McDonald's hamburger. He passed
out. When he came round a second later he found he was
sobbing for his mother.

He jerked himself violently to his feet.
          THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /              63

"Ford!"

Ford looked up from where he was sitting in a corner humming
to himself. He always found the actual travelling-through-space
part of space travel rather trying.

"Yeah?" he said.

"If you're a researcher on this book thing and you were on Earth,
you must have been gathering material on it."

"Well, I was able to extend the original entry a bit, yes."

"Let me see what it says in this edition then, I've got to see it."

"Yeah OK." He passed it over again.

Arthur grabbed hold of it and tried to stop his hands shaking.
He pressed the entry for the relevant page. The screen flashed
and swirled and resolved into a page of print. Arthur stared at it.

"It doesn't have an entry!" he burst out.

Ford looked over his shoulder.

"Yes it does," he said, "down there, see at the bottom of the
screen, just under Eccentrica Gallumbits, the triple-breasted
whore of Eroticon 6."

Arthur followed Ford's finger, and saw where it was pointing.
For a moment it still didn't register, then his mind nearly blew
up.

"What? Harmless? Is that all it's got to say? Harmless! One word!"

Ford shrugged.
                      64 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Well, there are a hundred billion stars in the Galaxy, and only a
limited amount of space in the book's microprocessors," he said,
"and no one knew much about the Earth of course."

"Well for God's sake I hope you managed to rectify that a bit."

"Oh yes, well I managed to transmit a new entry off to the editor.
He had to trim it a bit, but it's still an improvement."

"And what does it say now?" asked Arthur.

"Mostly harmless," admitted Ford with a slightly embarrassed
cough.

"Mostly harmless!" shouted Arthur. "What was that noise?" hissed
Ford.

"It was me shouting," shouted Arthur.

"No! Shut up!" said Ford. I think we're in trouble."

"You think we're in trouble!"

Outside the door were the sounds of marching feet.

"The Dentrassi?" whispered Arthur.

"No, those are steel tipped boots," said Ford.

There was a sharp ringing rap on the door.

"Then who is it?" said Arthur.

"Well," said Ford, "if we're lucky it's just the Vogons come to
throw us in to space."

"And if we're unlucky?"
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /            65

"If we're unlucky," said Ford grimly, "the captain might be serious
in his threat that he's going to read us some of his poetry first ..."
                      66 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Vogon poetry is of course the third worst in the Universe.

The second worst is that of the Azagoths of Kria. During a
recitation by their Poet Master Grunthos the Flatulent of his
poem "Ode To A Small Lump of Green Putty I Found In My
Armpit One Midsummer Morning" four of his audience died of
internal haemorrhaging, and the President of the Mid-Galactic
Arts Nobbling Council survived by gnawing one of his own legs
off. Grunthos is reported to have been "disappointed" by the
poem's reception, and was about to embark on a reading of his
twelve- book epic entitled My Favourite Bathtime Gurgles when
his own major intestine, in a desperate attempt to save life and
civilization, leapt straight up through his neck and throttled his
brain.

The very worst poetry of all perished along with its creator Paula
Nancy Millstone Jennings of Greenbridge, Essex, England in the
destruction of the planet Earth.

Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz smiled very slowly. This was done not so
much for effect as because he was trying to remember the
sequence of muscle movements.            He had had a terribly
therapeutic yell at his prisoners and was now feeling quite
relaxed and ready for a little callousness.

The prisoners sat in Poetry Appreciation Chairs --strapped in.
Vogons suffered no illusions as to the regard their works were
generally held in. Their early attempts at composition had been
part of bludgeoning insistence that they be accepted as a
properly evolved and cultured race, but now the only thing that
kept them going was sheer bloodymindedness.

The sweat stood out cold on Ford Prefect's brow, and slid round
the electrodes strapped to his temples. These were attached to a
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          67

battery of electronic equipment - imagery intensifiers, rhythmic
modulators, alliterative residulators and simile dumpers - all
designed to heighten the experience of the poem and make sure
that not a single nuance of the poet's thought was lost.

Arthur Dent sat and quivered. He had no idea what he was in
for, but he knew that he hadn't liked anything that had
happened so far and didn't think things were likely to change.

The Vogon began to read - a fetid little passage of his own
devising.

"Oh frettled gruntbuggly ..." he began. Spasms wracked Ford's
body - this was worse than ever he'd been prepared for.

"... thy micturations are to me | As plurdled gabbleblotchits on a
lurgid bee."

"Aaaaaaarggggghhhhhh!" went Ford Prefect, wrenching his head
back as lumps of pain thumped through it. He could dimly see
beside him Arthur lolling and rolling in his seat. He clenched his
teeth.

"Groop I implore thee," continued the merciless Vogon, "my
foonting turlingdromes."

His voice was rising to a horrible pitch of impassioned stridency.
"And hooptiously drangle me with crinkly bindlewurdles,| Or I
will rend thee in the gobberwarts with my blurglecruncheon, see
if I don't!"

"Nnnnnnnnnnyyyyyyyuuuuuuurrrrrrrggggggghhhhh!"          cried
Ford Prefect and threw one final spasm as the electronic
enhancement of the last line caught him full blast across the
temples. He went limp.
                       68 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Arthur lolled.

"Now Earthlings ..." whirred the Vogon (he didn't know that
Ford Prefect was in fact from a small planet in the vicinity of
Betelgeuse, and wouldn't have cared if he had) "I present you
with a simple choice! Either die in the vacuum of space, or ..." he
paused for melodramatic effect, "tell me how good you thought
my poem was!"

He threw himself backwards into a huge leathery bat-shaped seat
and watched them. He did the smile again.

Ford was rasping for breath. He rolled his dusty tongue round
his parched mouth and moaned.

Arthur said brightly: "Actually I quite liked it."

Ford turned and gaped. Here was an approach that had quite
simply not occurred to him.

The Vogon raised a surprised eyebrow that effectively obscured
his nose and was therefore no bad thing.

"Oh good ..." he whirred, in considerable astonishment.

"Oh yes," said Arthur, "I thought that some of the metaphysical
imagery was really particularly effective."

Ford continued to stare at him, slowly organizing his thoughts
around this totally new concept. Were they really going to be
able to bareface their way out of this?

"Yes, do continue ..." invited the Vogon.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           69

"Oh ... and er ... interesting rhythmic devices too," continued
Arthur, "which seemed to counterpoint the ... er ... er ..." He
floundered.

Ford leaped to his rescue, hazarding "counterpoint the
surrealism of the underlying metaphor of the ... er ..." He
floundered too, but Arthur was ready again.

"... humanity of the ..."

"Vogonity," Ford hissed at him.

"Ah yes, Vogonity (sorry) of the poet's compassionate soul,"
Arthur felt he was on a home stretch now, "which contrives
through the medium of the verse structure to sublimate this,
transcend that, and come to terms with the fundamental
dichotomies of the other," (he was reaching a triumphant
crescendo ...) "and one is left with a profound and vivid insight
into ... into ... er ..." (... which suddenly gave out on him.) Ford
leaped in with the coup de gr@ce:

"Into whatever it was the poem was about!" he yelled. Out of the
corner of his mouth: "Well done, Arthur, that was very good."

The Vogon perused them. For a moment his embittered racial
soul had been touched, but he thought no - too little too late. His
voice took on the quality of a cat snagging brushed nylon.

"So what you're saying is that I write poetry because underneath
my mean callous heartless exterior I really just want to be loved,"
he said. He paused. "Is that right?"

Ford laughed a nervous laugh. "Well I mean yes," he said, "don't
we all, deep down, you know ... er ..."
                      70 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

The Vogon stood up.

"No, well you're completely wrong," he said, "I just write poetry
to throw my mean callous heartless exterior into sharp relief. I'm
going to throw you off the ship anyway. Guard! Take the
prisoners to number three airlock and throw them out!"

"What?" shouted Ford. A huge young Vogon guard stepped
forward and yanked them out of their straps with his huge
blubbery arms.

"You can't throw us into space," yelled Ford, "we're trying to write
a book."

"Resistance is useless!" shouted the Vogon guard back at him. It
was the first phrase he'd learnt when he joined the Vogon Guard
Corps.

The captain watched with detached amusement and then turned
away.

Arthur stared round him wildly.

"I don't want to die now!" he yelled. "I've still got a headache! I
don't want to go to heaven with a headache, I'd be all cross and
wouldn't enjoy it!"

The guard grasped them both firmly round the neck, and
bowing deferentially towards his captain's back, hoiked them
both protesting out of the bridge. A steel door closed and the
captain was on his own again. He hummed quietly and mused to
himself, lightly fingering his notebook of verses.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /             71

"Hmmmm," he said, "counterpoint the surrealism of the
underlying metaphor ..." He considered this for a moment, and
then closed the book with a grim smile.

"Death's too good for them," he said.

The long steel-lined corridor echoed to the feeble struggles of the
two humanoids clamped firmly under rubbery Vogon armpits.

"This is great," spluttered Arthur, "this is really terrific. Let go of
me you brute!"

The Vogon guard dragged them on.

"Don't you worry," said Ford, "I'll think of something." He didn't
sound hopeful.

"Resistance is useless!" bellowed the guard.

"Just don't say things like that," stammered Ford. "How can
anyone maintain a positive mental attitude if you're saying things
like that?"

"My God," complained Arthur, "you're talking about a positive
mental attitude and you haven't even had your planet
demolished today. I woke up this morning and thought I'd have
a nice relaxed day, do a bit of reading, brush the dog ... It's now
just after four in the afternoon and I'm already thrown out of an
alien spaceship six light years from the smoking remains of the
Earth!" He spluttered and gurgled as the Vogon tightened his
grip.

"Alright," said Ford, "just stop panicking."
                       72 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Who said anything about panicking?" snapped Arthur. "This is
still just the culture shock. You wait till I've settled down into the
situation and found my bearings. Then I'll start panicking."

"Arthur you're getting hysterical.      Shut up!" Ford tried
desperately to think, but was interrupted by the guard shouting
again.

"Resistance is useless!"

"And you can shut up as well!" snapped Ford.

"Resistance is useless!"

"Oh give it a rest," said Ford. He twisted his head till he was
looking straight up into his captor's face. A thought struck him.

"Do you really enjoy this sort of thing?" he asked suddenly.

The Vogon stopped dead and a look of immense stupidity
seeped slowly over his face.

"Enjoy?" he boomed. "What do you mean?"

"What I mean," said Ford, "is does it give you a full satisfying life?
Stomping around, shouting, pushing people out of spaceships ..."

The Vogon stared up at the low steel ceiling and his eyebrows
almost rolled over each other. His mouth slacked. Finally he
said, "Well the hours are good ..."

"They'd have to be," agreed Ford.

Arthur twisted his head to look at Ford.

"Ford, what are you doing?" he asked in an amazed whisper.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /             73

"Oh, just trying to take an interest in the world around me, OK?"
he said. "So the hours are pretty good then?" he resumed.

The Vogon stared down at him as sluggish thoughts moiled
around in the murky depths.

"Yeah," he said, "but now you come to mention it, most of the
actual minutes are pretty lousy. Except ..." he thought again,
which required looking at the ceiling - "except some of the
shouting I quite like." He filled his lungs and bellowed,
"Resistance is ..."

"Sure, yes," interrupted Ford hurriedly, "you're good at that, I
can tell. But if it's mostly lousy," he said, slowly giving the words
time to reach their mark, "then why do you do it? What is it? The
girls? The leather? The machismo? Or do you just find that
coming to terms with the mindless tedium of it all presents an
interesting challenge?"

"Er ..." said the guard, "er ... er ... I dunno. I think I just sort of
... do it really. My aunt said that spaceship guard was a good
career for a young Vogon - you know, the uniform, the low-
slung stun ray holster, the mindless tedium ..."

"There you are Arthur," said Ford with the air of someone
reaching the conclusion of his argument, "you think you've got
problems."

Arthur rather thought he had. Apart from the unpleasant
business with his home planet the Vogon guard had half-
throttled him already and he didn't like the sound of being
thrown into space very much.
                      74 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Try and understand his problem," insisted Ford. "Here he is
poor lad, his entire life's work is stamping around, throwing
people off spaceships ..."

"And shouting," added the guard.

"And shouting, sure," said Ford patting the blubbery arm
clamped round his neck in friendly condescension, "... and he
doesn't even know why he's doing it!"

Arthur agreed this was very sad. He did this with a small feeble
gesture, because he was too asphyxicated to speak.

Deep rumblings of bemusement came from the guard.

"Well. Now you put it like that I suppose ..."

"Good lad!" encouraged Ford.

"But alright," went on the rumblings, "so what's the alternative?"

"Well," said Ford, brightly but slowly, "stop doing it of course!
Tell them," he went on, "you're not going to do it anymore." He
felt he had to add something to that, but for the moment the
guard seemed to have his mind occupied pondering that much.

"Eerrrrrrmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm ..." said the
guard, "erm, well that doesn't sound that great to me."

Ford suddenly felt the moment slipping away.

"Now wait a minute," he said, "that's just the start you see, there's
more to it than that you see ..."
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /             75

But at that moment the guard renewed his grip and continued
his original purpose of lugging his prisoners to the airlock. He
was obviously quite touched.

"No, I think if it's all the same to you," he said, "I'd better get you
both shoved into this airlock and then go and get on with some
other bits of shouting I've got to do."

It wasn't all the same to Ford Prefect after all.

"Come on now ... but look!" he said, less slowly, less brightly.
"Huhhhhgggggggnnnnnnn ..." said Arthur without any clear
inflection.

"But hang on," pursued Ford, "there's music and art and things
to tell you about yet! Arrrggghhh!"

"Resistance is useless," bellowed the guard, and then added, "You
see if I keep it up I can eventually get promoted to Senior
Shouting Officer, and there aren't usually many vacancies for
non-shouting and non-pushing-people-about officers, so I think
I'd better stick to what I know."

They had now reached the airlock - a large circular steel
hatchway of massive strength and weight let into the inner skin of
the craft. The guard operated a control and the hatchway swung
smoothly open.

"But thanks for taking an interest," said the Vogon guard. "Bye
now." He flung Ford and Arthur through the hatchway into the
small chamber within. Arthur lay panting for breath. Ford
scrambled round and flung his shoulder uselessly against the
reclosing hatchway.
                      76 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"But listen," he shouted to the guard, "there's a whole world you
don't know anything about ... here how about this?" Desperately
he grabbed for the only bit of culture he knew offhand - he
hummed the first bar of Beethoven's Fifth.

"Da da da dum! Doesn't that stir anything in you?"

"No," said the guard, "not really. But I'll mention it to my aunt."

If he said anything further after that it was lost. The hatchway
sealed itself tight, and all sound was lost but the faint distant hum
of the ship's engines.

They were in a brightly polished cylindrical chamber about six
feet in diameter and ten feet long.

"Potentially bright lad I thought," he said and slumped against
the curved wall.

Arthur was still lying in the curve of the floor where he had
fallen. He didn't look up. He just lay panting.

"We're trapped now aren't we?"

"Yes," said Ford, "we're trapped."

"Well didn't you think of anything? I thought you said you were
going to think of something. Perhaps you thought of something
and didn't notice."

"Oh yes, I thought of something," panted Ford. Arthur looked
up expectantly.

"But unfortunately," continued Ford, "it rather involved being on
the other side of this airtight hatchway." He kicked the hatch
they'd just been through.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /            77

"But it was a good idea was it?"

"Oh yes, very neat."

"What was it?"

"Well I hadn't worked out the details yet. Not much point now is
there?"

"So ... er, what happens next?"

"Oh, er, well the hatchway in front of us will open automatically
in a few moments and we will shoot out into deep space I expect
and asphyxicate. If you take a lungful of air with you you can
last for up to thirty seconds of course ..." said Ford. He stuck his
hands behind his back, raised his eyebrows and started to hum
an old Betelgeusian battle hymn. To Arthur's eyes he suddenly
looked very alien.

"So this is it," said Arthur, "we're going to die."

"Yes," said Ford, "except ... no! Wait a minute!" he suddenly
lunged across the chamber at something behind Arthur's line of
vision. "What's this switch?" he cried.

"What? Where?" cried Arthur twisting round.

"No, I was only fooling," said Ford, "we are going to die after all."

He slumped against the wall again and carried on the tune from
where he left off.

"You know," said Arthur, "it's at times like this, when I'm trapped
in a Vogon airlock with a man from Betelgeuse, and about to die
of asphyxication in deep space that I really wish I'd listened to
what my mother told me when I was young."
                       78 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Why, what did she tell you?"

"I don't know, I didn't listen."

"Oh." Ford carried on humming.

"This is terrific," Arthur thought to himself, "Nelson's Column has
gone, McDonald's have gone, all that's left is me and the words
Mostly Harmless. Any second now all that will be left is Mostly
Harmless. And yesterday the planet seemed to be going so well."

A motor whirred.

A slight hiss built into a deafening roar of rushing air as the outer
hatchway opened on to an empty blackness studded with tiny
impossibly bright points of light. Ford and Arthur popped into
outer space like corks from a toy gun.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /            79

The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy is a wholly remarkable
book. It has been compiled and recompiled many times over
many years and under many different editorships. It contains
contributions from countless numbers of travellers and
researchers.

The introduction begins like this:

"Space," it says, "is big. Really big. You just won't believe how
vastly hugely mindboggingly big it is. I mean you may think it's a
long way down the road to the chemist, but that's just peanuts to
space. Listen ..." and so on.

(After a while the style settles down a bit and it begins to tell you
things you really need to know, like the fact that the fabulously
beautiful planet Bethselamin is now so worried about the
cumulative erosion by ten billion visiting tourists a year that any
net imbalance between the amount you eat and the amount you
excrete whilst on the planet is surgically removed from your
bodyweight when you leave: so every time you go to the lavatory
it is vitally important to get a receipt.)

To be fair though, when confronted by the sheer enormity of
distances between the stars, better minds than the one
responsible for the Guide's introduction have faltered. Some
invite you to consider for a moment a peanut in reading and a
small walnut in Johannesburg, and other such dizzying concepts.

The simple truth is that interstellar distances will not fit into the
human imagination.

Even light, which travels so fast that it takes most races thousands
of years to realize that it travels at all, takes time to journey
between the stars. It takes eight minutes from the star Sol to the
                      80 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

place where the Earth used to be, and four years more to arrive
at Sol's nearest stellar neighbour, Alpha Proxima.

For light to reach the other side of the Galaxy, for it to reach
Damogran for instance, takes rather longer: five hundred
thousand years.

The record for hitch hiking this distance is just under five years,
but you don't get to see much on the way.

The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy says that if you hold a
lungful of air you can survive in the total vacuum of space for
about thirty seconds. However it goes on to say that what with
space being the mind boggling size it is the chances of getting
picked up by another ship within those thirty seconds are two to
the power of two hundred and sixty-seven thousand seven
hundred and nine to one against.

By a totally staggering coincidence that is also the telephone
number of an Islington flat where Arthur once went to a very
good party and met a very nice girl whom he totally failed to get
off with - she went off with a gatecrasher. Though the planet
Earth, the Islington flat and the telephone have all now been
demolished, it is comforting to reflect that they are all in some
small way commemorated by the fact that twenty-nine seconds
later Ford and Arthur were rescued.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           81

A computer chatted to itself in alarm as it noticed an airlock open
and close itself for no apparent reason.

This was because Reason was in fact out to lunch.

A hole had just appeared in the Galaxy. It was exactly a
nothingth of a second long, a nothingth of an inch wide, and
quite a lot of million light years from end to end.

As it closed up lots of paper hats and party balloons fell out of it
and drifted off through the universe. A team of seven three-
foot-high market analysts fell out of it and died, partly of
asphyxication, partly of surprise.

Two hundred and thirty-nine thousand lightly fried eggs fell out
of it too, materializing in a large woobly heap on the famine-
struck land of Poghril in the Pansel system.

The whole Poghril tribe had died out from famine except for one
last man who died of cholesterol poisoning some weeks later.

The nothingth of a second for which the hole existed
reverberated backwards and forwards through time in a most
improbable fashion. Somewhere in the deeply remote past it
seriously traumatized a small random group of atoms drifting
through the empty sterility of space and made them cling
together in the most extraordinarily unlikely patterns. These
patterns quickly learnt to copy themselves (this was part of what
was so extraordinary of the patterns) and went on to cause
massive trouble on every planet they drifted on to. That was how
life began in the Universe.

Five wild Event Maelstroms swirled in vicious storms of unreason
and spewed up a pavement.
                      82 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

On the pavement lay Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent gulping like
half-spent fish.

"There you are," gasped Ford, scrabbling for a fingerhold on the
pavement as it raced through the Third Reach of the Unknown,
"I told you I'd think of something."

"Oh sure," said Arthur, "sure."

"Bright idea of mine," said Ford, "to find a passing spaceship and
get rescued by it."

The real universe arched sickeningly away beneath them.
Various pretend ones flitted silently by, like mountain goats.
Primal light exploded, splattering space-time as with gobbets of
junket. Time blossomed, matter shrank away. The highest
prime number coalesced quietly in a corner and hid itself away
for ever.

"Oh come off it," said Arthur, "the chances against it were
astronomical."

"Don't knock it, it worked," said Ford.

"What sort of ship are we in?" asked Arthur as the pit of eternity
yawned beneath them.

"I don't know," said Ford, "I haven't opened my eyes yet."

"No, nor have I," said Arthur.

The Universe jumped, froze, quivered and splayed out in several
unexpected directions.

Arthur and Ford opened their eyes and looked about in
considerable surprise.
         THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          83

"Good god," said Arthur, "it looks just like the sea front at
Southend."

"Hell, I'm relieved to hear you say that," said Ford.

"Why?"

"Because I thought I must be going mad."

"Perhaps you are. Perhaps you only thought I said it."

Ford thought about this.

"Well, did you say it or didn't you?" he asked.

"I think so," said Arthur.

"Well, perhaps we're both going mad."

"Yes," said Arthur, "we'd be mad, all things considered, to think
this was Southend."

"Well, do you think this is Southend?"

"Oh yes."

"So do I."

"Therefore we must be mad."

"Nice day for it."

"Yes," said a passing maniac.

"Who was that?" asked Arthur
                      84 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Who - the man with the five heads and the elderberry bush full
of kippers?" "Yes."

"I don't know. Just someone."

"Ah."

They both sat on the pavement and watched with a certain
unease as huge children bounced heavily along the sand and wild
horses thundered through the sky taking fresh supplies of
reinforced railings to the Uncertain Areas.

"You know," said Arthur with a slight cough, "if this is Southend,
there's something very odd about it ..."

"You mean the way the sea stays steady and the buildings keep
washing up and down?" said Ford. "Yes I thought that was odd
too. In fact," he continued as with a huge bang Southend split
itself into six equal segments which danced and span giddily
round each other in lewd and licentious formation, "there is
something altogether very strange going on."

Wild yowling noises of pipes and strings seared through the
wind, hot doughnuts popped out of the road for ten pence each,
horrid fish stormed out of the sky and Arthur and Ford decided
to make a run for it.

They plunged through heavy walls of sound, mountains of
archaic thought, valleys of mood music, bad shoe sessions and
footling bats and suddenly heard a girl's voice.

It sounded quite a sensible voice, but it just said, "Two to the
power of one hundred thousand to one against and falling," and
that was all.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           85

Ford skidded down a beam of light and span round trying to find
a source for the voice but could see nothing he could seriously
believe in.

"What was that voice?" shouted Arthur.

"I don't know," yelled Ford, "I don't know. It sounded like a
measurement of probability."

"Probability? What do you mean?"

"Probability. You know, like two to one, three to one, five to four
against. It said two to the power of one hundred thousand to
one against. That's pretty improbable you know."

A million-gallon vat of custard upended itself over them without
warning.

"But what does it mean?" cried Arthur.

"What, the custard?"

"No, the measurement of probability!"

"I don't know. I don't know at all. I think we're on some kind of
spaceship."

"I can only assume," said Arthur, "that this is not the first- class
compartment."

Bulges appeared in the fabric of space-time. Great ugly bulges.

"Haaaauuurrgghhh ..." said Arthur as he felt his body softening
and bending in unusual directions. "Southend seems to be
melting away ... the stars are swirling ... a dustbowl ... my legs
are drifting off into the sunset ... my left arm's come off too." A
                        86 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

frightening thought struck him: "Hell," he said, "how am I going
to operate my digital watch now?" He wound his eyes desperately
around in Ford's direction.

"Ford," he said, "you're turning into a penguin. Stop it."

Again came the voice.

"Two to the power of seventy-five thousand to one against and
falling."

Ford waddled around his pond in a furious circle.

"Hey, who are you," he quacked. "Where are you? What's going
on and is there any way of stopping it?"

"Please relax," said the voice pleasantly, like a stewardess in an
airliner with only one wing and two engines one of which is on
fire, "you are perfectly safe."

"But that's not the point!" raged Ford. "The point is that I am
now a perfectly save penguin, and my colleague here is rapidly
running out of limbs!"

"It's alright, I've got them back now," said Arthur.

"Two to the power of fifty thousand to one against and falling,"
said the voice.

"Admittedly," said Arthur, "they're longer than I usually like
them, but ..."

"Isn't there anything," squawked Ford in avian fury, "you feel you
ought to be telling us?"
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           87

The voice cleared its throat. A giant petit four lolloped off into
the distance.

"Welcome," the voice said, "to the Starship Heart of Gold."

The voice continued.

"Please do not be alarmed," it said, "by anything you see or hear
around you. You are bound to feel some initial ill effects as you
have been rescued from certain death at an improbability level of
two to the power of two hundred and seventy-six thousand to
one against - possibly much higher. We are now cruising at a
level of two to the power of twenty-five thousand to one against
and falling, and we will be restoring normality just as soon as we
are sure what is normal anyway. Thank you. Two to the power
of twenty thousand to one against and falling."

The voice cut out.

Ford and Arthur were in a small luminous pink cubicle.

Ford was wildly excited.

"Arthur!" he said, "this is fantastic! We've been picked up by a
ship powered by the Infinite Improbability Drive! This is
incredible! I heard rumors about it before! They were all
officially denied, but they must have done it! They've built the
Improbability Drive! Arthur, this is ...         Arthur? What's
happening?"

Arthur had jammed himself against the door to the cubicle,
trying to hold it closed, but it was ill fitting. Tiny furry little
hands were squeezing themselves through the cracks, their
fingers were inkstained; tiny voices chattered insanely.
                    88 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Arthur looked up.

"Ford!" he said, "there's an infinite number of monkeys outside
who want to talk to us about this script for Hamlet they've
worked out."
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /        89

The Infinite Improbability Drive is a wonderful new method of
crossing vast interstellar distances in a mere nothingth of a
second, without all that tedious mucking about in hyperspace.

It was discovered by a lucky chance, and then developed into a
governable form of propulsion by the Galactic Government's
research team on Damogran.

This, briefly, is the story of its discovery.

The principle of generating small amounts of finite improbability
by simply hooking the logic circuits of a Bambleweeny 57 Sub-
Meson Brain to an atomic vector plotter suspended in a strong
Brownian Motion producer (say a nice hot cup of tea) were of
course well understood - and such generators were often used to
break the ice at parties by making all the molecules in the
hostess's undergarments leap simultaneously one foot to the left,
in accordance with the Theory of Indeterminacy.

Many respectable physicists said that they weren't going to stand
for this - partly because it was a debasement of science, but
mostly because they didn't get invited to those sort of parties.

Another thing they couldn't stand was the perpetual failure they
encountered in trying to construct a machine which could
generate the infinite improbability field needed to flip a
spaceship across the mind-paralysing distances between the
furthest stars, and in the end they grumpily announced that such
a machine was virtually impossible.

Then, one day, a student who had been left to sweep up the lab
after a particularly unsuccessful party found himself reasoning
this way:
                      90 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

If, he thought to himself, such a machine is a virtual
impossibility, then it must logically be a finite improbability. So
all I have to do in order to make one is to work out exactly how
improbable it is, feed that figure into the finite improbability
generator, give it a fresh cup of really hot tea ... and turn it on!

He did this, and was rather startled to discover that he had
managed to create the long sought after golden Infinite
Improbability generator out of thin air.

It startled him even more when just after he was awarded the
Galactic Institute's Prize for Extreme Cleverness he got lynched
by a rampaging mob of respectable physicists who had finally
realized that the one thing they really couldn't stand was a
smartass.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /            91

The Improbability-proof control cabin of the Heart of Gold
looked like a perfectly conventional spaceship except that it was
perfectly clean because it was so new. Some of the control seats
hadn't had the plastic wrapping taken off yet. The cabin was
mostly white, oblong, and about the size of a smallish restaurant.
In fact it wasn't perfectly oblong: the two long walls were raked
round in a slight parallel curve, and all the angles and corners
were contoured in excitingly chunky shapes. The truth of the
matter is that it would have been a great deal simpler and more
practical to build the cabin as an ordinary three-dimensional
oblong rom, but then the designers would have got miserable. As
it was the cabin looked excitingly purposeful, with large video
screens ranged over the control and guidance system panels on
the concave wall, and long banks of computers set into the
convex wall. In one corner a robot sat humped, its gleaming
brushed steel head hanging loosely between its gleaming brushed
steel knees. It too was fairly new, but though it was beautifully
constructed and polished it somehow looked as if the various
parts of its more or less humanoid body didn't quite fit properly.
In fact they fitted perfectly well, but something in its bearing
suggested that they might have fitted better.

Zaphod Beeblebrox paced nervously up and down the cabin,
brushing his hands over pieces of gleaming equipment and
giggling with excitement.

Trillian sat hunched over a clump of instruments reading off
figures. Her voice was carried round the Tannoy system of the
whole ship.

"Five to one against and falling ..." she said, "four to one against
and falling ... three to one ... two ... one ... probability factor of
one to one ... we have normality, I repeat we have normality."
She turned her microphone off - then turned it back on, with a
                      92 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

slight smile and continued: "Anything you still can't cope with is
therefore your own problem. Please relax. You will be sent for
soon."

Zaphod burst out in annoyance: "Who are they Trillian?"

Trillian span her seat round to face him and shrugged.

"Just a couple of guys we seem to have picked up in open space,"
she said. "Section ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha."

"Yeah, well that's a very sweet thought Trillian," complained
Zaphod, "but do you really think it's wise under the
circumstances? I mean, here we are on the run and everything,
we must have the police of half the Galaxy after us by now, and
we stop to pick up hitch hikers. OK, so ten out of ten for style,
but minus several million for good thinking, yeah?"

He tapped irritably at a control panel. Trillian quietly moved his
hand before he tapped anything important. Whatever Zaphod's
qualities of mind might include - dash, bravado, conceit - he was
mechanically inept and could easily blow the ship up with an
extravagant gesture. Trillian had come to suspect that the main
reason why he had had such a wild and successful life that he
never really understood the significance of anything he did.

"Zaphod," she said patiently, "they were floating unprotected in
open space ... you wouldn't want them to have died would you?"

"Well, you know ... no. Not as such, but ..."

"Not as such? Not die as such? But?" Trillian cocked her head on
one side.

"Well, maybe someone else might have picked them up later."
         THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           93

"A second later and they would have been dead."

"Yeah, so if you'd taken the trouble to think about the problem a
bit longer it would have gone away."

"You'd been happy to let them die?"

"Well, you know, not happy as such, but ..."

"Anyway," said Trillian, turning back to the controls, "I didn't
pick them up."

"What do you mean? Who picked them up then?"

"The ship did."

"Huh?"

"The ship did. All by itself."

"Huh?" "Whilst we were in Improbability Drive."

"But that's incredible."

"No Zaphod. Just very very improbable."

"Er, yeah."

"Look Zaphod," she said, patting his arm, "don't worry about the
aliens. They're just a couple of guys I expect. I'll send the robot
down to get them and bring them up here. Hey Marvin!"

In the corner, the robot's head swung up sharply, but then
wobbled about imperceptibly. It pulled itself up to its feet as if it
was about five pounds heavier that it actually was, and made
what an outside observer would have thought was a heroic effort
                        94 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

to cross the room. It stopped in front of Trillian and seemed to
stare through her left shoulder.

"I think you ought to know I'm feeling very depressed," it said.
Its voice was low and hopeless.

"Oh God," muttered Zaphod and slumped into a seat.

"Well," said Trillian in a bright compassionate tone, "here's
something to occupy you and keep your mind off things."

"It won't work," droned Marvin, "I have an exceptionally large
mind."

"Marvin!" warned Trillian.

"Alright," said Marvin, "what do you want me to do?"

"Go down to number two entry bay and bring the two aliens up
here under surveillance."

With a microsecond pause, and a finely calculated
micromodulation of pitch and timbre - nothing you could
actually take offence at - Marvin managed to convey his utter
contempt and horror of all things human.

"Just that?" he said.

"Yes," said Trillian firmly.

"I won't enjoy it," said Marvin.

Zaphod leaped out of his seat.

"She's not asking you to enjoy it," he shouted, "just do it will you?"
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /                95

"Alright," said Marvin like the tolling of a great cracked bell, "I'll
do it."

"Good ..." snapped Zaphod, "great ... thank you ..."

Marvin turned and lifted his flat-topped triangular red eyes up
towards him.

"I'm not getting you down at all am I?" he said pathetically.

"No no Marvin," lilted Trillian, "that's just fine, really ..."

"I wouldn't like to think that I was getting you down."

"No, don't worry about that," the lilt continued, "you just act as
comes naturally and everything will be just fine."

"You're sure you don't mind?" probed Marvin.

"No no Marvin," lilted Trillian, "that's just fine, really ... just part
of life."

"Marvin flashed him an electronic look.

"Life," said Marvin, "don't talk to me about life."

He turned hopelessly on his heel and lugged himself out of the
cabin. With a satisfied hum and a click the door closed behind
him

"I don't think I can stand that robot much longer Zaphod,"
growled Trillian.

The Encyclopaedia Galactica defines a robot as a mechanical
apparatus designed to do the work of a man. The marketing
                      96 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

division of the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation defines a robot as
"Your Plastic Pal Who's Fun To Be With."

The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy defines the marketing
division of the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation as "a bunch of
mindless jerks who'll be the first against the wall when the
revolution comes," with a footnote to the effect that the editors
would welcome applications from anyone interested in taking
over the post of robotics correspondent.

Curiously enough, an edition of the Encyclopaedia Galactica that
had the good fortune to fall through a time warp from a
thousand years in the future defined the marketing division of
the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation as "a bunch of mindless jerks
who were the first against the wall when the revolution came."

The pink cubicle had winked out of existence, the monkeys had
sunk away to a better dimension. Ford and Arthur found
themselves in the embarkation area of the ship. It was rather
smart.

"I think the ship's brand new," said Ford.

"How can you tell?" asked Arthur. "Have you got some exotic
device for measuring the age of metal?"

"No, I just found this sales brochure lying on the floor. It's a lot
of `the Universe can be yours' stuff. Ah! Look, I was right."

Ford jabbed at one of the pages and showed it to Arthur. "It
says: Sensational new breakthrough in Improbability Physics. As
soon as the ship's drive reaches Infinite Improbability it passes
through every point in the Universe. Be the envy of other major
governments. Wow, this is big league stuff."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           97

Ford hunted excitedly through the technical specs of the ship,
occasionally gasping with astonishment at what he read - clearly
Galactic astrotechnology had moved ahead during the years of
his exile.

Arthur listened for a short while, but being unable to understand
the vast majority of what Ford was saying he began to let his
mind wander, trailing his fingers along the edge of an
incomprehensible computer bank, he reached out and pressed
an invitingly large red button on a nearby panel. The panel lit
up with the words Please do not press this button again. He
shook himself.

"Listen," said Ford, who was still engrossed in the sales brochure,
"they make a big thing of the ship's cybernetics. A new
generation of Sirius Cybernetics Corporation robots and
computers, with the new GPP feature."

"GPP feature?" said Arthur. "What's that?"

"Oh, it says Genuine People Personalities."

"Oh," said Arthur, "sounds ghastly."

A voice behind them said, "It is." The voice was low and hopeless
and accompanied by a slight clanking sound. They span round
and saw an abject steel man standing hunched in the doorway.

"What?" they said.

"Ghastly," continued Marvin, "it all is. Absolutely ghastly. Just
don't even talk about it. Look at this door," he said, stepping
through it. The irony circuits cut into his voice modulator as he
mimicked the style of the sales brochure. "All the doors in this
spaceship have a cheerful and sunny disposition. It is their
                      98 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

pleasure to open for you, and their satisfaction to close again with
the knowledge of a job well done."

As the door closed behind them it became apparent that it did
indeed    have    a   satisfied  sigh-like quality   to     it.
"Hummmmmmmyummmmmmm ah!" it said.

Marvin regarded it with cold loathing whilst his logic circuits
chattered with disgust and tinkered with the concept of directing
physical violence against it Further circuits cut in saying, Why
bother? What's the point? Nothing is worth getting involved in.
Further circuits amused themselves by analysing the molecular
components of the door, and of the humanoids' brain cells. For a
quick encore they measured the level of hydrogen emissions in
the surrounding cubic parsec of space and then shut down again
in boredom. A spasm of despair shook the robot's body as he
turned.

"Come on," he droned, "I've been ordered to take you down to
the bridge. Here I am, brain the size of a planet and they ask me
to take you down to the bridge. Call that job satisfaction? 'Cos I
don't."

He turned and walked back to the hated door.

"Er, excuse me," said Ford following after him, "which
government owns this ship?"

Marvin ignored him.

"You watch this door," he muttered, "it's about to open again. I
can tell by the intolerable air of smugness it suddenly generates."

With an ingratiating little whine the door slit open again and
Marvin stomped through.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         99

"Come on," he said.

The others followed quickly and the door slit back into place with
pleased little clicks and whirrs.

"Thank you the marketing division of the Sirius Cybernetics
Corporation," said Marvin and trudged desolately up the
gleaming curved corridor that stretched out before them. "Let's
build robots with Genuine People Personalities," they said. So
they tried it out with me. I'm a personality prototype. You can
tell can't you?"

Ford and Arthur muttered embarrassed little disclaimers.

"I hate that door," continued Marvin. "I'm not getting you down
at all am I?"

"Which government ..." started Ford again.

"No government owns it," snapped the robot, "it's been stolen."

"Stolen?"

"Stolen?" mimicked Marvin.

"Who by?" asked Ford.

"Zaphod Beeblebrox."

Something extraordinary happened to Ford's face. At least five
entirely separate and distinct expressions of shock and
amazement piled up on it in a jumbled mess. His left leg, which
was in mid stride, seemed to have difficulty in finding the floor
again. He stared at the robot and tried to entangle some dartoid
muscles.
                    100 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Zaphod Beeblebrox ...?" he said weakly.

"Sorry, did I say something wrong?" said Marvin, dragging
himself on regardless. "Pardon me for breathing, which I never
do anyway so I don't know why I bother to say it, oh God I'm so
depressed. Here's another of those self-satisfied door. Life!
Don't talk to me about life." "No one ever mentioned it,"
muttered Arthur irritably. "Ford, are you alright?"

Ford stared at him. "Did that robot say Zaphod Beeblebrox?" he
said.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /            101

A loud clatter of gunk music flooded through the Heart of Gold
cabin as Zaphod searched the sub-etha radio wavebands for news
of himself. The machine was rather difficult to operate. For
years radios had been operated by means of pressing buttons and
turning dials; then as the technology became more sophisticated
the controls were made touch-sensitive - you merely had to brush
the panels with your fingers; now all you had to do was wave
your hand in the general direction of the components and hope.
It saved a lot of muscular expenditure of course, but meant that
you had to sit infuriatingly still if you wanted to keep listening to
the same programme.

Zaphod waved a hand and the channel switched again. More
gunk music, but this time it was a background to a news
announcement. The news was always heavily edited to fit the
rhythms of the music.

"... and news brought to you here on the sub-etha wave band,
broadcasting around the galaxy around the clock," squawked a
voice, "and we'll be saying a big hello to all intelligent life forms
everywhere ... and to everyone else out there, the secret is to
bang the rocks together, guys. And of course, the big news story
tonight is the sensational theft of the new Improbability Drive
prototype ship by none other than Galactic President Zaphod
Beeblebrox. And the question everyone's asking is ... has the big
Z finally flipped? Beeblebrox, the man who invented the Pan
Galactic Gargle Blaster, ex-confidence trickster, once described
by Eccentrica Gallumbits as the Best Bang since the Big One, and
recently voted the Wort Dressed Sentinent Being in the Known
Universe for the seventh time ... has he got an answer this time?
We asked his private brain care specialist Gag Halfrunt ..." The
music swirled and dived for a moment. Another voice broke in,
presumably Halfrunt. He said: "Vell, Zaphod's jist zis guy you
                      102 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

know?" but got no further because an electric pencil flew across
the cabin and through the radio's on/off sensitive airspace.
Zaphod turned and glared at Trillian - she had thrown the
pencil.

"Hey," he said, what do you do that for?"

Trillian was tapping her fingers on a screenful of figures.

"I've just thought of something," she said.

"Yeah? Worth interrupting a news bulletin about me for?"

"You hear enough about yourself as it is."

"I'm very insecure. We know that." "Can we drop your ego for a
moment? This is important."

"If there's anything more important than my ego around, I want
it caught and shot now." Zaphod glared at her again, then
laughed.

"Listen," she said, "we picked up those couple of guys ..."

"What couple of guys?"

"The couple of guys we picked up."

"Oh, yeah," said Zaphod, "those couple of guys."

"We picked them up in sector ZZ 9 Plural Z Alpha."

"Yeah?" said Zaphod and blinked.

Trillian said quietly, "Does that mean anything to you?"
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          103

"Mmmmm," said Zaphod, "ZZ 9 Plural Z Alpha. ZZ 9 Plural Z
Alpha?"

"Well?" said Trillian.

"Er ... what does the Z mean?" said Zaphod.

"Which one?"

"Any one."

One of the major difficulties Trillian experienced in her
relationship with Zaphod was learning to distinguish between
him pretending to be stupid just to get people off their guard,
pretending to be stupid because he couldn't be bothered to think
and wanted someone else to do it for him, pretending to be
outrageously stupid to hide the fact that he actually didn't
understand what was going on, and really being genuinely
stupid. He was renowned for being amazingly clever and quite
clearly was so - but not all the time, which obviously worried him,
hence the act. He proffered people to be puzzled rather than
contemptuous. This above all appeared to Trillian to be
genuinely stupid, but she could no longer be bothered to argue
about it.

She sighed and punched up a star map on the visiscreen so she
could make it simple for him, whatever his reasons for wanting it
to be that way.

"There," she pointed, "right there."

"Hey ... Yeah!" said Zaphod.

"Well?" she said.
                      104 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Well what?"

Parts of the inside of her head screamed at other parts of the
inside of her head. She said, very calmly, "It's the same sector
you originally picked me up in."

He looked at her and then looked back at the screen. "Hey,
yeah," he said, "now that is wild. We should have zapped straight
into the middle of the Horsehead Nebula. How did we come to
be there? I mean that's nowhere."

She ignored this.

"Improbability Drive," she said patiently. "You explained it to me
yourself. We pass through every point in the Universe, you
know that."

"Yeah, but that's one wild coincidence isn't it?"

"Yes."

"Picking someone up at that point? Out of the whole of the
Universe to choose from? That's just too ... I want to work this
out. Computer!"

The Sirius Cybernetics Corporation Shipboard Computer which
controlled and permeated every particle of the ship switched into
communication mode.

"Hi there!" it said brightly and simultaneously spewed out a tiny
ribbon of ticker tape just for the record. The ticker tape said, Hi
there!

"Oh God," said Zaphod. He hadn't worked with this computer
for long but had already learned to loathe it.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         105

The computer continued, brash and cheery as if it was selling
detergent.

"I want you to know that whatever your problem, I am here to
help you solve it."

"Yeah yeah," said Zaphod. "Look, I think I'll just use a piece of
paper."

"Sure thing," said the computer, spilling out its message into a
waste bin at the same time, "I understand. If you ever want ..."

"Shut up!" said Zaphod, and snatching up a pencil sat down next
to Trillian at the console.

"OK, OK ..." said the computer in a hurt tone of voice and closed
down its speech channel again.

Zaphod and Trillian pored over the figures that the
Improbability flight path scanner flashed silently up in front of
them.

"Can we work out," said Zaphod, "from their point of view what
the Improbability of their rescue was?"

"Yes, that's a constant", said Trillian, "two to the power of two
hundred and seventy-six thousand seven hundred and nine to
one against."

"That's high. They're two lucky lucky guys." "Yes."

"But relative to what we were doing when the ship picked them
up ..."
                       106 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Trillian punched up the figures. They showed tow-to-the power-
of-Infinity-minus-one (an irrational number that only has a
conventional meaning in Improbability physics).

"... it's pretty low," continued Zaphod with a slight whistle.

"Yes," agreed Trillian, and looked at him quizzically.

"That's one big whack of Improbability to be accounted for.
Something pretty improbable has got to show up on the balance
sheet if it's all going to add up into a pretty sum."

Zaphod scribbled a few sums, crossed them out and threw the
pencil away.

"Bat's dots, I can't work it out."

"Well?"

Zaphod knocked his two heads together in irritation and gritted
his teeth.

"OK," he said. "Computer!"

The voice circuits sprang to life again.

"Why hello there!" they said (ticker tape, ticker tape). "All I want
to do is make your day nicer and nicer and nicer ..."

"Yeah well shut up and work something out for me."

"Sure thing," chattered the computer, "you want a probability
forecast based on ..."

"Improbability data, yeah."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /            107

"OK," the computer continued. "Here's an interesting little
notion. Did you realize that most people's lives are governed by
telephone numbers?"

A pained look crawled across one of Zaphod's faces and on to the
other one.

"Have you flipped?" he said.

"No, but you will when I tell you that ..."

Trillian gasped.      She scrabbled at the buttons on the
Improbability flight path screen.

"Telephone number?" she said. "Did that thing say telephone
number?" Numbers flashed up on the screen.

The computer had paused politely, but now it continued.

"What I was about to say was that ..."

"Don't bother please," said Trillian.

"Look, what is this?" said Zaphod.

"I don't know," said Trillian, "but those aliens - they're on the way
up to the bridge with that wretched robot. Can we pick them up
on any monitor cameras?"
                      108 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Marvin trudged on down the corridor, still moaning.

"... and then of course I've got this terrible pain in all the diodes
down my left hand side ..."

"No?" said Arthur grimly as he walked along beside him.
"Really?"

"Oh yes," said Marvin, "I mean I've asked for them to be replaced
but no one ever listens."

"I can imagine."

Vague whistling and humming noises were coming from Ford.
"Well well well," he kept saying to himself, "Zaphod Beeblebrox
..."

Suddenly Marvin stopped, and held up a hand.

"You know what's happened now of course?"

"No, what?" said Arthur, who didn't what to know.

"We've arrived at another of those doors."

There was a sliding door let into the side of the corridor. Marvin
eyed it suspiciously.

"Well?" said Ford impatiently. "Do we go through?"

"Do we go through?" mimicked Marvin. "Yes. This is the
entrance to the bridge. I was told to take you to the bridge.
Probably the highest demand that will be made on my
intellectual capacities today I shouldn't wonder."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         109

Slowly, with great loathing, he stepped towards the door, like a
hunter stalking his prey. Suddenly it slid open.

"Thank you," it said, "for making a simple door very happy."

Deep in Marvin's thorax gears ground.

"Funny," he intoned funerally, "how just when you think life can't
possibly get any worse it suddenly does." He heaved himself
through the door and left Ford and Arthur staring at each other
and shrugging their shoulders. From inside they heard Marvin's
voice again.

"I suppose you want to see the aliens now," he said. "Do you
want me to sit in a corner and rust, or just fall apart where I'm
standing?"

"Yeah, just show them in would you Marvin?" came another
voice.

Arthur looked at Ford and was astonished to see him laughing.

"What's ...?"

"Shhh," said Ford, "come in."

He stepped through into the bridge.

Arthur followed him in nervously and was astonished to see a
man lolling back in a chair with his feet on a control console
picking the teeth in his right-hand head with his left hand. The
right-hand head seemed to be thoroughly preoccupied with this
task, but the left-hand one was grinning a broad, relaxed,
nonchalant grin. The number of things that Arthur couldn't
                     110 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

believe he was seeing was fairly large. His jaw flapped about at a
loose end for a while.

The peculiar man waved a lazy wave at Ford and with an
appalling affectation of nonchalance said, "Ford, hi, how are you?
Glad you could drop in."

Ford was not going to be outcooled.

"Zaphod," he drawled, "great to see you, you're looking well, the
extra arm suits you. Nice ship you've stolen."

Arthur goggled at him.

"You mean you know this guy?" he said, waving a wild finger at
Zaphod.

"Know him!" exclaimed Ford, "he's ..." he paused, and decided to
do the introductions the other way round.

"Oh, Zaphod, this is a friend of mine, Arthur Dent," he said, "I
saved him when his planet blew up."

"Oh sure," said Zaphod, "hi Arthur, glad you could make it." His
right-hand head looked round casually, said "hi" and went back
to having his teeth picked.

Ford carried on. "And Arthur," he said, "this is my semi-cousin
Zaphod Beeb ..."

"We've met," said Arthur sharply.

When you're cruising down the road in the fast lane and you
lazily sail past a few hard driving cars and are feeling pretty
pleased with yourself and then accidentally change down from
fourth to first instead of third thus making your engine leap out
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /        111

of your bonnet in a rather ugly mess, it tends to throw you off
your stride in much the same way that this remark threw Ford
Prefect off his.

"Err ... what?"

"I said we've met."

Zaphod gave an awkward start of surprise and jabbed a gum
sharply.

"Hey ... er, have we? Hey ... er ..."

Ford rounded on Arthur with an angry flash in his eyes. Now he
felt he was back on home ground he suddenly began to resent
having lumbered himself with this ignorant primitive who knew
as much about the affairs of the Galaxy as an Ilford-based gnat
knew about life in Peking.

"What do you mean you've met?" he demanded. "This is Zaphod
Beeblebrox from Betelgeuse Five you know, not bloody Martin
Smith from Croydon."

"I don't care," said Arthur coldly. We've met, haven't we Zaphod
Beeblebrox - or should I say ... Phil?"

"What!" shouted Ford.

"You'll have to remind me," said Zaphod. "I've a terrible memory
for species."

"It was at a party," pursued Arthur.

"Yeah, well I doubt that," said Zaphod.

"Cool it will you Arthur!" demanded Ford.
                      112 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Arthur would not be deterred. "A party six months ago. On
Earth ... England ..."

Zaphod shook his head with a tight-lipped smile.

"London," insisted Arthur, "Islington."

"Oh," said Zaphod with a guilty start, "that party."

This wasn't fair on Ford at all. He looked backwards and
forwards between Arthur and Zaphod. "What?" he said to
Zaphod. "You don't mean to say you've been on that miserable
planet as well do you?"

"No, of course not," said Zaphod breezily. "Well, I may have just
dropped in briefly, you know, on my way somewhere ..."

"But I was stuck there for fifteen years!"

"Well I didn't know that did I?" "But what were you doing there?"

"Looking about, you know."

"He gatecrashed a party," persisted Arthur, trembling with anger,
"a fancy dress party ..."

"It would have to be, wouldn't it?" said Ford.

"At this party," persisted Arthur, "was a girl ... oh well, look it
doesn't matter now. The whole place has gone up in smoke
anyway ..."

"I wish you'd stop sulking about that bloody planet," said Ford.
"Who was the lady?"
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /            113

"Oh just somebody. Well alright, I wasn't doing very well with
her. I'd been trying all evening. Hell, she was something
though. Beautiful, charming, devastatingly intelligent, at last I'd
got her to myself for a bit and was plying her with a bit of talk
when this friend of yours barges up and says Hey doll, is this guy
boring you? Why don't you talk to me instead? I'm from a
different planet." I never saw her again."

"Zaphod?" exclaimed Ford.

"Yes," said Arthur, glaring at him and trying not to feel foolish.
"He only had the two arms and the one head and he called
himself Phil, but ..."

"But you must admit he did turn out to be from another planet,"
said Trillian wandering into sight at the other end of the bridge.
She gave Arthur a pleasant smile which settled on him like a ton
of bricks and then turned her attention to the ship's controls
again.

There was silence for a few seconds, and then out of the
scrambled mess of Arthur's brain crawled some words.

"Tricia McMillian?" he said. "What are you doing here?"

"Same as you," she said, "I hitched a lift. After all with a degree in
Maths and another in astrophysics what else was there to do? It
was either that or the dole queue again on Monday."

"Infinity minus one," chattered the computer, "Improbability sum
now complete."

Zaphod looked about him, at Ford, at Arthur, and then at
Trillian.
                     114 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Trillian," he said, "is this sort of thing going to happen every
time we use the Improbability drive?"

"Very probably, I'm afraid," she said.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           115

The Heart of Gold fled on silently through the night of space,
now on conventional photon drive. Its crew of four were ill at
ease knowing that they had been brought together not of their
own volition or by simple coincidence, but by some curious
principle of physics - as if relationships between people were
susceptible to the same laws that governed the relationships
between atoms and molecules.

As the ship's artificial night closed in they were each grateful to
retire to separate cabins and try to rationalize their thoughts.

Trillian couldn't sleep. She sat on a couch and stared at a small
cage which contained her last and only links with Earth - two
white mice that she had insisted Zaphod let her bring. She had
expected not to see the planet again, but she was disturbed by
her negative reaction to the planet's destruction. It seemed
remote and unreal and she could find no thoughts to think about
it. She watched the mice scurrying round the cage and running
furiously in their little plastic treadwheels till they occupied her
whole attention. Suddenly she shook herself and went back to
the bridge to watch over the tiny flashing lights and figures that
charted the ship's progress through the void. She wished she
knew what it was she was trying not to think about.

Zaphod couldn't sleep. He also wished he knew what it was that
he wouldn't let himself think about. For as long as he could
remember he'd suffered from a vague nagging feeling of being
not all there. Most of the time he was able to put this thought
aside and not worry about it, but it had been re-awakened by the
sudden inexplicable arrival of Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent.
Somehow it seemed to conform to a pattern that he couldn't see.

Ford couldn't sleep. He was too excited about being back on the
road again. Fifteen years of virtual imprisonment were over, just
                      116 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

as he was finally beginning to give up hope. Knocking about
with Zaphod for a bit promised to be a lot of fun, though there
seemed to be something faintly odd about his semi-cousin that he
couldn't put his finger on. The fact that he had become
President of the Galaxy was frankly astonishing, as was the
manner of his leaving the post. Was there a reason behind it?
There would be no point in asking Zaphod, he never appeared
to have a reason for anything he did at all: he had turned
unfathomably into an art form. He attacked everything in life
with a mixture of extraordinary genius and naive incompetence
and it was often difficult to tell which was which.

Arthur slept: he was terribly tired.

There was a tap at Zaphod's door. It slid open.

"Zaphod ...?"

"Yeah?"

"I think we just found what you came to look for."

"Hey, yeah?" Ford gave up the attempt to sleep. In the corner of
his cabin was a small computer screen and keyboard. He sat at it
for a while and tried to compose a new entry for the Guide on
the subject of Vogons but couldn't think of anything vitriolic
enough so he gave that up too, wrapped a robe round himself
and went for a walk to the bridge.

As he entered he was surprised to see two figures hunched
excitedly over the instruments.

"See? The ship's about to move into orbit," Trillian was saying.
"There's a planet out there. It's at the exact coordinates you
predicted."
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /            117

Zaphod heard a noise and looked up.

"Ford!" he hissed. "Hey, come and take a look at this."

Ford went and had a look at it. It was a series of figures flashing
over a screen.

"You recognize those Galactic coordinates?" said Zaphod.

"No."

"I'll give you a clue. Computer!"

"Hi gang!" enthused the computer. "This is getting real sociable
isn't it?"

"Shut up," said Zaphod, "and show up the screens."

Light on the bridge sank. Pinpoints of light played across the
consoles and reflected in four pairs of eyes that stared up at the
external monitor screens.

There was absolutely nothing on them.

"Recognize that?" whispered Zaphod.

Ford frowned.

"Er, no," he said.

"What do you see?"

"Nothing."

"Recognize it?"

"What are you talking about?"
                       118 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"We're in the Horsehead Nebula. One whole vast dark cloud."

"And I was meant to recognize that from a blank screen?"

"Inside a dark nebula is the only place in the Galaxy you'd see a
dark screen." "Very good."

Zaphod laughed. He was clearly very excited about something,
almost childishly so.

"Hey, this is really terrific, this is just far too much!"

"What's so great about being stuck in a dust cloud?" said Ford.

"What would you reckon to find here?" urged Zaphod.

"Nothing."

"No stars? No planets?"

"No."

"Computer!" shouted Zaphod, "rotate angle of vision through
one- eighty degrees and don't talk about it!"

For a moment it seemed that nothing was happening, then a
brightness glowed at the edge of the huge screen. A red star the
size of a small plate crept across it followed quickly by another
one - a binary system. Then a vast crescent sliced into the corner
of the picture - a red glare shading away into the deep black, the
night side of the planet.

"I've found it!" cried Zaphod, thumping the console. "I've found
it!"

Ford stared at it in astonishment.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /        119

"What is it?" he said.

"That ..." said Zaphod, "is the most improbable planet that ever
existed."
                     120 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

(Excerpt from The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy, Page
634784, Section 5a, Entry: Magrathea)

Far back in the mists of ancient time, in the great and glorious
days of the former Galactic Empire, life was wild, rich and largely
tax free.

Mighty starships plied their way between exotic suns, seeking
adventure and reward amongst the furthest reaches of Galactic
space. In those days spirits were brave, the stakes were high,
men were real men, women were real women, and small furry
creatures from Alpha Centauri were real small furry creatures
from Alpha Centauri. And all dared to brave unknown terrors,
to do mighty deeds, to boldly split infinitives that no man had
split before - and thus was the Empire forged.

Many men of course became extremely rich, but this was
perfectly natural and nothing to be ashamed of because no one
was really poor - at least no one worth speaking of. And for all
the richest and most successful merchants life inevitably became
rather dull and niggly, and they began to imagine that this was
therefore the fault of the worlds they'd settled on - none of them
was entirely satisfactory: either the climate wasn't quite right in
the later part of the afternoon, or the day was half an hour too
long, or the sea was exactly the wrong shade of pink.

And thus were created the conditions for a staggering new form
of specialist industry: custom-made luxury planet building. The
home of this industry was the planet Magrathea, where
hyperspatial engineers sucked matter through white holes in
space to form it into dream planets - gold planets, platinum
planets, soft rubber planets with lots of earthquakes - all lovingly
made to meet the exacting standards that the Galaxy's richest
men naturally came to expect.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          121

But so successful was this venture that Magrathea itself soon
became the richest planet of all time and the rest of the Galaxy
was reduced to abject poverty. And so the system broke down,
the Empire collapsed, and a long sullen silence settled over a
billion worlds, disturbed only by the pen scratchings of scholars
as they laboured into the night over smug little treaties on the
value of a planned political economy.

Magrathea itself disappeared and its memory soon passed into
the obscurity of legend.

In these enlightened days of course, no one believes a word of it.
                      122 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Arthur awoke to the sound of argument and went to the bridge.
Ford was waving his arms about.

"You're crazy, Zaphod," he was saying, "Magrathea is a myth, a
fairy story, it's what parents tell their kids about at night if they
want them to grow up to become economists, it's ..."

"And that's what we are currently in orbit around," insisted
Zaphod.

"Look, I can't help what you may personally be in orbit around,"
said Ford, "but this ship ..."

"Computer!" shouted Zaphod.

"Oh no ..."

"Hi there! This is Eddie your shipboard computer, and I'm
feeling just great guys, and I know I'm just going to get a bundle
of kicks out of any programme you care to run through me."

Arthur looked inquiringly at Trillian. She motioned him to come
on in but keep quiet.

"Computer," said Zaphod, "tell us again what our present
trajectory is." "A real pleasure feller," it burbled, "we are currently
in orbit at an altitude of three hundred miles around the
legendary planet of Magrathea."

"Proving nothing," said Ford. "I wouldn't trust that computer to
speak my weight."

"I can do that for you, sure," enthused the computer, punching
out more tickertape. "I can even work out you personality
problems to ten decimal places if it will help."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /            123

Trillian interrupted.

"Zaphod," she said, "any minute now we will be swinging round
to the daylight side of this planet," adding, "whatever it turns out
to be."

"Hey, what do you mean by that? The planet's where I predicted
it would be isn't it?"

"Yes, I know there's a planet there. I'm not arguing with anyone,
it's just that I wouldn't know Magrathea from any other lump of
cold rock. Dawn's coming up if you want it."

"OK, OK," muttered Zaphod, "let's at least give our eyes a good
time. Computer!"

"Hi there! What can I ..."

"Just shut up and give us a view of the planet again."

A dark featureless mass once more filled the screens - the planet
rolling away beneath them.

They watched for a moment in silence, but Zaphod was fidgety
with excitement.

"We are now traversing the night side ..." he said in a hushed
voice. The planet rolled on.

"The surface of the planet is now three hundred miles beneath us
..." he continued. He was trying to restore a sense of occasion to
what he felt should have been a great moment. Magrathea! He
was piqued by Ford's sceptical reaction. Magrathea!

"In a few seconds," he continued, "we should see ... there!"
                     124 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

The moment carried itself. Even the most seasoned star tramp
can't help but shiver at the spectacular drama of a sunrise seen
from space, but a binary sunrise is one of the marvels of the
Galaxy.

Out of the utter blackness stabbed a sudden point of blinding
light. It crept up by slight degrees and spread sideways in a thin
crescent blade, and within seconds two suns were visible, furnaces
of light, searing the black edge of the horizon with white fire.
Fierce shafts of colour streaked through the thin atmosphere
beneath them. "The fires of dawn ... !" breathed Zaphod. "The
twin suns of Soulianis and Rahm ... !"

"Or whatever," said Ford quietly.

"Soulianis and Rahm!" insisted Zaphod.

The suns blazed into the pitch of space and a low ghostly music
floated through the bridge: Marvin was humming ironically
because he hated humans so much.

As Ford gazed at the spectacle of light before them excitement
burnt inside him, but only the excitement of seeing a strange new
planet, it was enough for him to see it as it was. It faintly
irritated him that Zaphod had to impose some ludicrous fantasy
on to the scene to make it work for him. All this Magrathea
nonsense seemed juvenile. Isn't it enough to see that a garden is
beautiful without having to believe that there are fairies at the
bottom of it too?

All this Magrathea business seemed totally incomprehensible to
Arthur. He edged up to Trillian and asked her what was going
on.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /        125

"I only know what Zaphod's told me," she whispered.
"Apparently Magrathea is some kind of legend from way back
which no one seriously believes in. Bit like Atlantis on Earth,
except that the legends say the Magratheans used to manufacture
planets."

Arthur blinked at the screens and felt he was missing something
important. Suddenly he realized what it was.

"Is there any tea on this spaceship?" he asked.

More of the planet was unfolding beneath them as the Heart of
Gold streaked along its orbital path. The suns now stood high in
the black sky, the pyrotechnics of dawn were over, and the
surface of the planet appeared bleak and forbidding in the
common light of day - grey, dusty and only dimly contoured. It
looked dead and cold as a crypt. From time to time promising
features would appear on the distant horizon - ravines, maybe
mountains, maybe even cities - but as they approached the lines
would soften and blur into anonymity and nothing would
transpire. The planet's surface was blurred by time, by the slow
movement of the thin stagnant air that had crept across it for
century upon century.

Clearly, it was very very old.

A moment of doubt came to Ford as he watched the grey
landscape move beneath them. The immensity of time worried
him, he could feel it as a presence. He cleared his throat.

"Well, even supposing it is ..."

"It is," said Zaphod.
                       126 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Which it isn't," continued Ford. "What do you want with it
anyway? There's nothing there." "Not on the surface," said
Zaphod.

"Alright, just supposing there's something. I take it you're not
here for the sheer industrial archaeology of it all. What are you
after?"

One of Zaphod's heads looked away. The other one looked
round to see what the first was looking at, but it wasn't looking at
anything very much.

"Well," said Zaphod airily, "it's partly the curiosity, partly a sense
of adventure, but mostly I think it's the fame and the money ..."

Ford glanced at him sharply. He got a very strong impression
that Zaphod hadn't the faintest idea why he was there at all.

"You know I don't like the look of that planet at all," said Trillian
shivering.

"Ah, take no notice," said Zaphod, "with half the wealth of the
former Galactic Empire stored on it somewhere it can afford to
look frumpy."

Bullshit, thought Ford. Even supposing this was the home of
some ancient civilization now gone to dust, even supposing a
number of exceedingly unlikely things, there was no way that
vast treasures of wealth were going to be stored there in any form
that would still have meaning now. He shrugged.

"I think it's just a dead planet," he said.

"The suspense is killing me," said Arthur testily.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         127

Stress and nervous tension are now serious social problems in all
parts of the Galaxy, and it is in order that this situation should
not in any way be exacerbated that the following facts will now be
revealed in advance.

The planet in question is in fact the legendary Magrathea.

The deadly missile attack shortly to be launched by an ancient
automatic defence system will result merely in the breakage of
three coffee cups and a micecage, the bruising of somebody's
upper arm, and the untimely creation and sudden demise of a
bowl of petunias and an innocent sperm whale.

In order that some sense of mystery should still be preserved, no
revelation will yet be made concerning whose upper arm
sustained the bruise. This fact may safely be made the subject of
suspense since it is of no significance whatsoever.
                         128 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

After a fairly shaky start to the day, Arthur's mind was beginning
to reassemble itself from the shellshocked fragments the previous
day had left him with. He had found a Nutri-Matic machine
which had provided him with a plastic cup filled with a liquid
that was almost, but not quite, entirely unlike tea. The way it
functioned was very interesting. When the Drink button was
pressed it made an instant but highly detailed examination of the
subject's taste buds, a spectroscopic analysis of the subject's
metabolism and then sent tiny experimental signals down the
neural pathways to the taste centres of the subject's brain to see
what was likely to go down well. However, no one knew quite
why it did this because it invariably delivered a cupful of liquid
that was almost, but not quite, entirely unlike tea. The Nutri-
Matic was designed and manufactured by the Sirius Cybernetics
Corporation whose complaints department now covers all the
major land masses of the first three planets in the Sirius Tau Star
system.

Arthur drank the liquid and found it reviving. He glanced up at
the screens again and watched a few more hundred miles of
barren greyness slide past. It suddenly occurred to him to ask a
question which had been bothering him.

"Is it safe?" he said.

"Magrathea's been dead for five million years," said Zaphod, "of
course it's safe. Even the ghosts will have settled down and raised
families by now." At which point a strange and inexplicable sound
thrilled suddenly through the bridge - a noise as of a distant
fanfare; a hollow, reedy, insubstantial sound. It preceded a voice
that was equally hollow, reedy and insubstantial. The voice said
"Greetings to you ..."

Someone from the dead planet was talking to them.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           129

"Computer!" shouted Zaphod.

"Hi there!"

"What the photon is it?"

"Oh, just some five-million-year-old tape that's being broadcast at
us."

"A what? A recording?"

"Shush!" said Ford. "It's carrying on."

The voice was old, courteous, almost charming, but was
underscored with quite unmistakable menace.

"This is a recorded announcement," it said, "as I'm afraid we're all
out at the moment. The commercial council of Magrathea
thanks you for your esteemed visit ..."

("A voice from ancient Magrathea!" shouted Zaphod. "OK, OK,"
said Ford.)

"... but regrets," continued the voice, "that the entire planet is
temporarily closed for business. Thank you. If you would care
to leave your name and the address of a planet where you can be
contacted, kindly speak when you hear the tone." A short buzz
followed, then silence.

"They want to get rid of us," said Trillian nervously. "What do we
do?"

"It's just a recording," said Zaphod. "We keep going. Got that,
computer?"
                    130 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"I got it," said the computer and gave the ship an extra kick of
speed.

They waited.

After a second or so came the fanfare once again, and then the
voice.

"We would like to assure you that as soon as our business is
resumed announcements will be made in all fashionable
magazines and colour supplements, when our clients will once
again be able to select from all that's best in contemporary
geography." The menace in the voice took on a sharper edge.
"Meanwhile we thank our clients for their kind interest and
would ask them to leave. Now."

Arthur looked round the nervous faces of his companions.

"Well, I suppose we'd better be going then, hadn't we?" he
suggested.

"Shhh!" said Zaphod. "There's absolutely nothing to be worried
about."

"Then why's everyone so tense?"

"They're just interested!" shouted Zaphod. "Computer, start a
descent into the atmosphere and prepare for landing."

This time the fanfare was quite perfunctory, the voice distinctly
cold.

"It is most gratifying," it said, "that your enthusiasm for our
planet continues unabated, and so we would like to assure you
that the guided missiles currently converging with your ship are
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           131

part of a special service we extend to all of our most enthusiastic
clients, and the fully armed nuclear warheads are of course
merely a courtesy detail. We look forward to your custom in
future lives ... thank you."

The voice snapped off.

"Oh," said Trillian.

"Er ..." said Arthur.

"Well?" said Ford.

"Look," said Zaphod, "will you get it into your heads? That's just a
recorded message. It's millions of years old. It doesn't apply to
us, get it?" "What," said Trillian quietly, "about the missiles?"

"Missiles? Don't make me laugh."

Ford tapped Zaphod on the shoulder and pointed at the rear
screen. Clear in the distance behind them two silver darts were
climbing through the atmosphere towards the ship. A quick
change of magnification brought them into close focus - two
massively real rockets thundering through the sky.          The
suddenness of it was shocking.

"I think they're going to have a very good try at applying to us,"
said Ford.

Zaphod stared at them in astonishment.

"Hey this is terrific!" he said. "Someone down there is trying to
kill us!"

"Terrific," said Arthur.
                      132 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"But don't you see what this means?"

"Yes. We're going to die."

"Yes, but apart from that."

"Apart from that?"

"It means we must be on to something!"

"How soon can we get off it?"

Second by second the image of the missiles on the screen became
larger. They had swung round now on to a direct homing
course so that all that could be seen of them now was the
warheads, head on.

"As a matter of interest," said Trillian, "what are we going to do?"

"Just keep cool," said Zaphod.

"Is that all?" shouted Arthur.

"No, we're also going to ... er ... take evasive action!" said
Zaphod with a sudden access of panic. "Computer, what evasive
action can we take?"

"Er, none I'm afraid, guys," said the computer.

"... or something," said Zaphod, "... er ..." he said.

"There seems to be something jamming my guidance system,"
explained the computer brightly, "impact minus forty-five
seconds. Please call me Eddie if it will help you to relax."
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           133

Zaphod tried to run in several equally decisive directions
simultaneously. "Right!" he said. "Er ... we've got to get manual
control of this ship."

"Can you fly her?" asked Ford pleasantly.

"No, can you?"

"No."

"Trillian, can you?"

"No."

"Fine," said Zaphod, relaxing. "We'll do it together."

"I can't either," said Arthur, who felt it was time he began to
assert himself.

"I'd guessed that," said Zaphod.      "OK computer, I want full
manual control now."

"You got it," said the computer.

Several large desk panels slid open and banks of control consoles
sprang up out of them, showering the crew with bits of expanded
polystyrene packaging and balls of rolled-up cellophane: these
controls had never been used before.

Zaphod stared at them wildly.

"OK, Ford," he said, "full retro thrust and ten degrees starboard.
Or something ..."

"Good luck guys," chirped the computer, "impact minus thirty
seconds ..."
                    134 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Ford leapt to the controls - only a few of them made any
immediate sense to him so he pulled those. The ship shook and
screamed as its guidance rocked jets tried to push it every which
way simultaneously. He released half of them and the ship span
round in a tight arc and headed back the way it had come,
straight towards the oncoming missiles.

Air cushions ballooned out of the walls in an instant as everyone
was thrown against them. For a few seconds the inertial forces
held them flattened and squirming for breath, unable to move.
Zaphod struggled and pushed in manic desperation and finally
managed a savage kick at a small lever that formed part of the
guidance system.

The lever snapped off. The ship twisted sharply and rocketed
upwards. The crew were hurled violently back across the cabin.
Ford's copy of The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy smashed
into another section of the control console with the combined
result that the guide started to explain to anyone who cared to
listen about the best ways of smuggling Antarean parakeet glands
out of Antares (an Antarean parakeet gland stuck on a small stick
is a revolting but much sought after cocktail delicacy and very
large sums of money are often paid for them by very rich idiots
who want to impress other very rich idiots), and the ship
suddenly dropped out of the sky like a stone.

It was of course more or less at this moment that one of the crew
sustained a nasty bruise to the upper arm. This should be
emphasized because, as had already been revealed, they escape
otherwise completely unharmed and the deadly nuclear missiles
do not eventually hit the ship. The safety of the crew is
absolutely assured.

"Impact minus twenty seconds, guys ..." said the computer.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /             135

"Then turn the bloody engines back on!" bawled Zaphod.

"OK, sure thing, guys," said the computer. With a subtle roar the
engines cut back in, the ship smoothly flattened out of its dive
and headed back towards the missiles again.

The computer started to sing.

"When you walk through the storm ..." it whined nasally, "hold
your head up high ..."

Zaphod screamed at it to shut up, but his voice was lost in the din
of what they quite naturally assumed was approaching
destruction.

"And don't ... be afraid ... of the dark!" Eddie wailed.

The ship, in flattening out had in fact flattened out upside down
and lying on the ceiling as they were it was now totally impossible
for any of the crew to reach the guidance systems.

"At the end of the storm ..." crooned Eddie.

The two missiles loomed massively on the screens as they
thundered towards the ship.

"... is a golden sky ..."

But by an extraordinarily lucky chance they had not yet fully
corrected their flight paths to that of the erratically weaving ship,
and they passed right under it.

"And the sweet silver songs of the lark ... Revised impact time
fifteen seconds fellas ... Walk on through the wind ..."
                     136 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

The missiles banked round in a screeching arc and plunged back
into pursuit.

"This is it," said Arthur watching them.     "We are now quite
definitely going to die aren't we?"

"I wish you'd stop saying that," shouted Ford.

"Well we are aren't we?"

"Yes." "Walk on through the rain ..." sang Eddie.

A thought struck Arthur. He struggled to his feet.

"Why doesn't anyone turn on this Improbability Drive thing?" he
said. "We could probably reach that."

"What are you crazy?" said Zaphod.                "Without proper
programming anything could happen."

"Does that matter at this stage?" shouted Arthur.

"Though your dreams be tossed and blown ..." sand Eddie.

Arthur scrambled up on to one end of the excitingly chunky
pieces of moulded contouring where the curve of the wall met
the ceiling.

"Walk on, walk on, with hope in your heart ..."

"Does anyone know why Arthur can't turn on the Improbability
Drive?" shouted Trillian.

"And you'll never walk alone ... Impact minus five seconds, it's
been great knowing you guys, God bless ... You'll ne ... ver ...
walk ... alone!"
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /       137

"I said," yelled Trillian, "does anyone know ..."

The next thing that happened was a mid-mangling explosion of
noise and light.
                     138 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

And the next thing that happened after that was that the Heart
of Gold continued on its way perfectly normally with a rather
fetchingly redesigned interior. It was somewhat larger, and done
out in delicate pastel shades of green and blue. In the centre a
spiral staircase, leading nowhere in particular, stood in a spray of
ferns and yellow flowers and next to it a stone sundial pedestal
housed the main computer terminal. Cunningly deployed
lighting and mirrors created the illusion of standing in a
conservatory overlooking a wide stretch of exquisitely manicured
garden. Around the periphery of the conservatory area stood
marble-topped tables on intricately beautiful wrought-iron legs.
As you gazed into the polished surface of the marble the vague
forms of instruments became visible, and as you touched them
the instruments materialized instantly under your hands.
Looked at from the correct angles the mirrors appeared to reflect
all the required data readouts, though it was far from clear where
they were reflected from. It was in fact sensationally beautiful.

Relaxing in a wickerwork sun chair, Zaphod Beeblebrox said,
"What the hell happened?"

"Well I was just saying," said Arthur lounging by a small fish pool,
"there's this Improbability Drive switch over here ..." he waved at
where it had been. There was a potted plant there now. "But
where are we?" said Ford who was sitting on the spiral staircase, a
nicely chilled Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster in his hand.

"Exactly where we were, I think ..." said Trillian, as all about
them the mirrors showed them an image of the blighted
landscape of Magrathea which still scooted along beneath them.

Zaphod leapt out of his seat.

"Then what's happened to the missiles?" he said.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          139

A new and astounding image appeared in the mirrors.

"They would appear," said Ford doubtfully, "to have turned into
a bowl of petunias and a very surprised looking whale ..."

"At an Improbability Factor," cut in Eddie, who hadn't changed a
bit, "of eight million seven hundred and sixty-seven thousand
one hundred and twenty-eight to one against."

Zaphod stared at Arthur.

"Did you think of that, Earthman?" he demanded.

"Well," said Arthur, "all I did was ..."

"That's very good thinking you know. Turn on the Improbability
Drive for a second without first activating the proofing screens.
Hey kid you just saved our lives, you know that?"

"Oh," said Arthur, "well, it was nothing really ..."

"Was it?" said Zaphod. "Oh well, forget it then. OK, computer,
take us in to land."

"But ..."

"I said forget it."

Another thing that got forgotten was the fact that against all
probability a sperm whale had suddenly been called into
existence several miles above the surface of an alien planet.

And since this is not a naturally tenable position for a whale, this
poor innocent creature had very little time to come to terms with
its identity as a whale before it then had to come to terms with
not being a whale any more.
                       140 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

This is a complete record of its thoughts from the moment it
began its life till the moment it ended it.

Ah ... ! What's happening? it thought.

Er, excuse me, who am I?

Hello? Why am I here? What's my purpose in life?

What do I mean by who am I?

Calm down, get a grip now ... oh! this is an interesting sensation,
what is it? It's a sort of ... yawning, tingling sensation in my ...
my ... well I suppose I'd better start finding names for things if I
want to make any headway in what for the sake of what I shall
call an argument I shall call the world, so let's call it my stomach.

Good. Ooooh, it's getting quite strong. And hey, what's about
this whistling roaring sound going past what I'm suddenly going
to call my head? Perhaps I can call that ... wind! Is that a good
name? It'll do ... perhaps I can find a better name for it later
when I've found out what it's for. It must be something very
important because there certainly seems to be a hell of a lot of it.
Hey! What's this thing? This ... let's call it a tail - yeah, tail. Hey!
I can can really thrash it about pretty good can't I? Wow! Wow!
That feels great! Doesn't seem to achieve very much but I'll
probably find out what it's for later on. Now - have I built up any
coherent picture of things yet?

No. Never mind, hey, this is really exciting, so much to find out
about, so much to look forward to, I'm quite dizzy with
anticipation ... \hspace{1cm} Or is it the wind?

There really is a lot of that now isn't it?
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         141

And wow! Hey! What's this thing suddenly coming towards me
very fast? Very very fast. So big and flat and round, it needs a
big wide sounding name like ... ow ... ound ... round ...
ground! That's it! That's a good name - ground!

I wonder if it will be friends with me?

And the rest, after a sudden wet thud, was silence.

Curiously enough, the only thing that went through the mind of
the bowl of petunias as it fell was Oh no, not again. Many people
have speculated that if we knew exactly why the bowl of petunias
had thought that we would know a lot more about the nature of
the universe than we do now.
                     142 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Are we taking this robot with us?" said Ford, looking with
distaste at Marvin who was standing in an awkward hunched
posture in the corner under a small palm tree.

Zaphod glanced away from the mirror screens which presented a
pa\-no\-ra\-mic view of the blighted landscape on which the Heart
of Gold had now landed.

"Oh, the Paranoid Android," he said. "Yeah, we'll take him."

"But what are supposed to do with a manically depressed robot?"

"You think you've got problems," said Marvin as if he was
addressing a newly occupied coffin, "what are you supposed to do
if you are a manically depressed robot? No, don't bother to
answer that, I'm fifty thousand times more intelligent than you
and even I don't know the answer. It gives me a headache just
trying to think down to your level."

Trillian burst in through the door from her cabin.

"My white mice have escaped!" she said.

An expression of deep worry and concern failed to cross either of
Zaphod's faces.

"Nuts to your white mice," he said.

Trillian glared an upset glare at him, and disappeared again.

It is possible that her remark would have commanded greater
attention had it been generally realized that human beings were
only the third most intelligent life form present on the planet
Earth, instead of (as was generally thought by most independent
observers) the second.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         143

"Good afternoon boys."

The voice was oddly familiar, but oddly different. It had a
matriarchal twang. It announced itself to the crew as they
arrived at the airlock hatchway that would let them out on the
planet surface.

They looked at each other in puzzlement.

"It's the computer," explained Zaphod. "I discovered it had an
emergency back-up personality that I thought might work out
better."

"Now this is going to be your first day out on a strange new
planet," continued Eddie's new voice, "so I want you all wrapped
up snug and warm, and no playing with any naughty bug-eyed
monsters."

Zaphod tapped impatiently on the hatch.

"I'm sorry," he said, "I think we might be better off with a slide
rule."

"Right!" snapped the computer. "Who said that?"

"Will you open the exit hatch please, computer?" said Zaphod
trying not to get angry.

"Not until whoever said that owns up," urged the computer,
stamping a few synapses closed. "Oh God," muttered Ford,
slumped against a bulkhead and started to count to ten. He was
desperately worried that one day sentinent life forms would
forget how to do this. Only by counting could humans
demonstrate their independence of computers.
                     144 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Come on," said Eddie sternly.

"Computer ..." began Zaphod ...

"I'm waiting," interrupted Eddie. "I can wait all day if necessary
..."

"Computer ..." said Zaphod again, who had been trying to think
of some subtle piece of reasoning to put the computer down with,
and had decided not to bother competing with it on its own
ground, "if you don't open that exit hatch this moment I shall zap
straight off to your major data banks and reprogram you with a
very large axe, got that?"

Eddie, shocked, paused and considered this.

Ford carried on counting quietly. This is about the most
aggressive thing you can do to a computer, the equivalent of
going up to a human being and saying Blood ... blood ... blood
... blood ...

Finally Eddie said quietly, "I can see this relationship is
something we're all going to have to work at," and the hatchway
opened.

An icy wind ripped into them, they hugged themselves warmly
and stepped down the ramp on to the barren dust of Magrathea.

"It'll all end in tears, I know it," shouted Eddie after them and
closed the hatchway again.

A few minutes later he opened and closed the hatchway again in
response to a command that caught him entirely by surprise.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /             145

Five figures wandered slowly over the blighted land. Bits of it
were dullish grey, bits of it dullish brown, the rest of it rather less
interesting to look at. It was like a dried-out marsh, now barren
of all vegetation and covered with a layer of dust about an inch
thick. It was very cold.

Zaphod was clearly rather depressed about it. He stalked off by
himself and was soon lost to sight behind a slight rise in the
ground.

The wind stung Arthur's eyes and ears, and the stale thin air
clasped his throat. However, the thing stung most was his mind.

"It's fantastic ..." he said, and his own voice rattled his ears.
Sound carried badly in this thin atmosphere. "Desolate hole if
you ask me," said Ford. "I could have more fun in a cat litter."
He felt a mounting irritation. Of all the planets in all the star
systems of all the Galaxy - didn't he just have to turn up at a
dump like this after fifteen years of being a castaway? Not even a
hot dog stand in evidence. He stooped down and picked up a
cold clot of earth, but there was nothing underneath it worth
crossing thousands of light years to look at.

"No," insisted Arthur, "don't you understand, this is the first time
I've actually stood on the surface of another planet ... a whole
alien world ...! Pity it's such a dump though."

Trillian hugged herself, shivered and frowned. She could have
sworn she saw a slight and unexpected movement out of the
corner of her eye, but when she glanced in that direction all she
could see was the ship, still and silent, a hundred yards or so
behind them.
                      146 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

She was relieved when a second or so later they caught sight of
Zaphod standing on top of the ridge of ground and waving to
them to come and join him.

He seemed to be excited, but they couldn't clearly hear what he
was saying because of the thinnish atmosphere and the wind.

As they approached the ridge of higher ground they became
aware that it seemed to be circular - a crater about a hundred
and fifty yards wide. Round the outside of the crater the sloping
ground was spattered with black and red lumps. They stopped
and looked at a piece. It was wet. It was rubbery.

With horror they suddenly realized that it was fresh whalemeat.

At the top of the crater's lip they met Zaphod.

"Look," he said, pointing into the crater.

In the centre lay the exploded carcass of a lonely sperm whale
that hadn't lived long enough to be disappointed with its lot.
The silence was only disturbed by the slight involuntary spasms
of Trillian's throat.

"I suppose there's no point in trying to bury it?" murmured
Arthur, and then wished he hadn't.

"Come," said Zaphod and started back down into the crater.

"What, down there?" said Trillian with severe distaste.

"Yeah," said Zaphod, "come on, I've got something to show you."

"We can see it," said Trillian.

"Not that," said Zaphod, "something else. Come on."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /             147

They all hesitated.

"Come on," insisted Zaphod, "I've found a way in." "In?" said
Arthur in horror.

"Into the interior of the planet! An underground passage. The
force of the whale's impact cracked it open, and that's where we
have to go. Where no man has trod these five million years, into
the very depths of time itself ..."

Marvin started his ironical humming again.

Zaphod hit him and he shut up.

With little shudders of disgust they all followed Zaphod down the
incline into the crater, trying very hard not to look at its
unfortunate creator.

"Life," said Marvin dolefully, "loathe it or ignore it, you can't like
it."

The ground had caved in where the whale had hit it revealing a
network of galleries and passages, now largely obstructed by
collapsed rubble and entrails. Zaphod had made a start clearing
a way into one of them, but Marvin was able to do it rather faster.
Dank air wafted out of its dark recesses, and as Zaphod shone a
torch into it, little was visible in the dusty gloom.

"According to the legends," he said, "the Magratheans lived most
of their lives underground."

"Why's that?" said Arthur. "Did the surface become too polluted
or overpopulated?"
                     148 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"No, I don't think so," said Zaphod. "I think they just didn't like
it very much."

"Are you sure you know what you're doing?" said Trillian peering
nervously into the darkness. "We've been attacked once already
you know."

"Look kid, I promise you the live population of this planet is nil
plus the four of us, so come on, let's get on in there. Er, hey
Earthman ..."

"Arthur," said Arthur.

"Yeah could you just sort of keep this robot with you and guard
this end of the passageway. OK?"

"Guard?" said Arthur. "What from? You just said there's no one
here."

"Yeah, well, just for safety, OK?" said Zaphod.

"Whose? Yours or mine?"

"Good lad. OK, here we go."

Zaphod scrambled down into the passage, followed by Trillian
and Ford. "Well I hope you all have a really miserable time,"
complained Arthur.

"Don't worry," Marvin assured him, "they will."

In a few seconds they had disappeared from view.

Arthur stamped around in a huff, and then decided that a
whale's graveyard is not on the whole a good place to stamp
around in.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           149

Marvin eyed him balefully for a moment, and then turned
himself off.

Zaphod marched quickly down the passageway, nervous as hell,
but trying to hide it by striding purposefully. He flung the torch
beam around. The walls were covered in dark tiles and were
cold to the touch, the air thick with decay.

"There, what did I tell you?" he said. "An inhabited planet.
Magrathea," and he strode on through the dirt and debris that
littered the tile floor.

Trillian was reminded unavoidably of the London Underground,
though it was less thoroughly squalid.

At intervals along the walls the tiles gave way to large mosaics -
simple angular patterns in bright colours. Trillian stopped and
studied one of them but could not interpret any sense in them.
She called to Zaphod.

"Hey, have you any idea what these strange symbols are?"

"I think they're just strange symbols of some kind," said Zaphod,
hardly glancing back.

Trillian shrugged and hurried after him.

>From time to time a doorway led either to the left or right into
smallish chambers which Ford discovered to be full of derelict
computer equipment. He dragged Zaphod into one to have a
look. Trillian followed.

"Look," said Ford, "you reckon this is Magrathea ..."

"Yeah," said Zaphod, "and we heard the voice, right?"
                       150 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"OK, so I've bought the fact that it's Magrathea - for the moment.
What you have so far said nothing about is how in the Galaxy you
found it. You didn't just look it up in a star atlas, that's for sure."

"Research. Government archives. Detective work. Few lucky
guesses. Easy."

"And then you stole the Heart of Gold to come and look for it
with?"

"I stole it to look for a lot of things." "A lot of things?" said Ford in
surprise. "Like what?"

"I don't know."

"What?"

"I don't know what I'm looking for."

"Why not?"

"Because ... because ... I think it might be because if I knew I
wouldn't be able to look for them."

"What, are you crazy?"

"It's a possibility I haven't ruled out yet," said Zaphod quietly. "I
only know as much about myself as my mind can work out under
its current conditions. And its current conditions are not good."

For a long time nobody said anything as Ford gazed at Zaphod
with a mind suddenly full of worry.

"Listen old friend, if you want to ..." started Ford eventually.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          151

"No, wait ... I'll tell you something," said Zaphod. "I freewheel a
lot. I get an idea to do something, and, hey, why not, I do it. I
reckon I'll become President of the Galaxy, and it just happens,
it's easy. I decide to steal this ship. I decide to look for
Magrathea, and it all just happens. Yeah, I work out how it can
best be done, right, but it always works out. It's like having a
Galacticredit card which keeps on working though you never
send off the cheques. And then whenever I stop and think - why
did I want to do something? - how did I work out how to do it? -
I get a very strong desire just to stop thinking about it. Like I
have now. It's a big effort to talk about it."

Zaphod paused for a while. For a while there was silence. Then
he frowned and said, "Last night I was worrying about this again.
About the fact that part of my mind just didn't seem to work
properly. Then it occurred to me that the way it seemed was that
someone else was using my mind to have good ideas with,
without telling me about it. I put the two ideas together and
decided that maybe that somebody had locked off part of my
mind for that purpose, which was why I couldn't use it. I
wondered if there was a way I could check.

"I went to the ship's medical bay and plugged myself into the
encephelographic screen. I went through every major screening
test on both my heads - all the tests I had to go through under
government medical officers before my nomination for
Presidency could be properly ratified. They showed up nothing.
Nothing unexpected at least. They showed that I was clever,
imaginative, irresponsible, untrustworthy, extrovert, nothing you
couldn't have guessed. And no other anomalies. So I started
inventing further tests, completely at random. Nothing. Then I
tried superimposing the results from one head on top of the
results from the other head. Still nothing. Finally I got silly,
                      152 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

because I'd given it all up as nothing more than an attack of
paranoia. Last thing I did before I packed it in was take the
superimposed picture and look at it through a green filter. You
remember I was always superstitious about the color green when
I was a kid? I always wanted to be a pilot on one of the trading
scouts?"

Ford nodded.

"And there it was," said Zaphod, "clear as day. A whole section in
the middle of both brains that related only to each other and not
to anything else around them. Some bastard had cauterized all
the synapses and electronically traumatised those two lumps of
cerebellum."

Ford stared at him, aghast. Trillian had turned white.

"Somebody did that to you?" whispered Ford.

"Yeah."

"But have you any idea who? Or why?"

"Why? I can only guess. But I do know who the bastard was."

"You know? How do you know?"

"Because they left their initials burnt into the cauterized synapses.
They left them there for me to see."

Ford stared at him in horror and felt his skin begin to crawl.

"Initials? Burnt into your brain?"

"Yeah."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /             153

"Well, what were they, for God's sake?"

Zaphod looked at him in silence again for a moment. Then he
looked away.

"Z.B.," he said.

At that moment a steel shutter slammed down behind them and
gas started to pour into the chamber.

"I'll tell you about it later," choked Zaphod as all three passed out.
                     154 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

On the surface of Magrathea Arthur wandered about moodily.

Ford had thoughtfully left him his copy of The Hitch Hiker's
Guide to the Galaxy to while away the time with. He pushed a
few buttons at random.

The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy is a very unevenly edited
book and contains many passages that simply seemed to its
editors like a good idea at the time.

One of these (the one Arthur now came across) supposedly
relates the experiences of one Veet Voojagig, a quiet young
student at the University of Maximegalon, who pursued a
brilliant academic career studying ancient philology,
transformational ethics and the wave harmonic theory of
historical perception, and then, after a night of drinking Pan
Galactic Gargle Blasters with Zaphod Beeblebrox, became
increasingly obsessed with the problem of what had happened to
all the biros he'd bought over the past few years.

There followed a long period of painstaking research during
which he visited all the major centres of biro loss throughout the
galaxy and eventually came up with a quaint little theory which
quite caught the public imagination at the time. Somewhere in
the cosmos, he said, along with all the planets inhabited by
humanoids, reptiloids, fishoids, walking treeoids and
superintelligent shades of the colour blue, there was also a planet
entirely given over to biro life forms. And it was to this planet
that unattended biros would make their way, slipping away
quietly through wormholes in space to a world where they knew
they could enjoy a uniquely biroid lifestyle, responding to highly
biro-oriented stimuli, and generally leading the biro equivalent
of the good life.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          155

And as theories go this was all very fine and pleasant until Veet
Voojagig suddenly claimed to have found this planet, and to
have worked there for a while driving a limousine for a family of
cheap green retractables, whereupon he was taken away, locked
up, wrote a book, and was finally sent into tax exile, which is the
usual fate reserved for those who are determined to make a fool
of themselves in public.

When one day an expedition was sent to the spatial coordinates
that Voojagig had claimed for this planet they discovered only a
small asteroid inhabited by a solitary old man who claimed
repeatedly that nothing was true, though he was later discovered
to be lying.

There did, however, remain the question of both the mysterious
60,000 Altairan dollars paid yearly into his Brantisvogan bank
account, and of course Zaphod Beeblebrox's highly profitable
second-hand biro business.

Arthur read this, and put the book down.

The robot still sat there, completely inert.

Arthur got up and walked to the top of the crater. He walked
around the crater. He watched two suns set magnificently over
Magrathea.

He went back down into the crater. He woke the robot up
because even a manically depressed robot is better to talk to than
nobody.

"Night's falling," he said. "Look robot, the stars are coming out."
>From the heart of a dark nebula it is possible to see very few
stars, and only very faintly, but they were there to be seen.
                        156 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

The robot obediently looked at them, then looked back.

"I know," he said. "Wretched isn't it?"

"But that sunset! I've never seen anything like it in my wildest
dreams ... the two suns! It was like mountains of fire boiling into
space."

"I've seen it," said Marvin. "It's rubbish."

"We only ever had the one sun at home," persevered Arthur, "I
came from a planet called Earth you know."

"I know," said Marvin, "you keep going on about it. It sounds
awful."

"Ah no, it was a beautiful place."

"Did it have oceans?"

"Oh yes," said Arthur with a sigh, "great wide rolling blue oceans
..."

"Can't bear oceans," said Marvin.

"Tell me," inquired Arthur, "do you get on well with other
robots?"

"Hate them," said Marvin. "Where are you going?"

Arthur couldn't bear any more. He had got up again.

"I think I'll just take another walk," he said.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         157

"Don't blame you," said Marvin and counted five hundred and
ninety-seven thousand million sheep before falling asleep again a
second later.

Arthur slapped his arms about himself to try and get his
circulation a little more enthusiastic about its job. He trudged
back up the wall of the crater.

Because the atmosphere was so thin and because there was no
moon, nightfall was very rapid and it was by now very dark.
Because of this, Arthur practically walked into the old man
before he noticed him.
                       158 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

He was standing with his back to Arthur watching the very last
glimmers of light sink into blackness behind the horizon. He was
tallish, elderly and dressed in a single long grey robe. When he
turned his face was thin and distinguished, careworn but not
unkind, the sort of face you would happily bank with. But he
didn't turn yet, not even to react to Arthur's yelp of surprise.

Eventually the last rays of the sun had vanished completely, and
he turned. His face was still illuminated from somewhere, and
when Arthur looked for the source of the light he saw that a few
yards away stood a small craft of some kind - a small hovercraft,
Arthur guessed. It shed a dim pool of light around it.

The man looked at Arthur, sadly it seemed.

"You choose a cold night to visit our dead planet," he said.

"Who ... who are you?" stammered Arthur.

The man looked away. Again a kind of sadness seemed to cross
his face.

"My name is not important," he said.

He seemed to have something on his mind. Conversation was
clearly something he felt he didn't have to rush at. Arthur felt
awkward.

"I ... er ... you startled me ..." he said, lamely.

The man looked round to him again and slightly raised his
eyebrows.

"Hmmmm?" he said.

"I said you startled me."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           159

"Do not be alarmed, I will not harm you."

Arthur frowned at him. "But you shot at us! There were missiles
..." he said.

The man chuckled slightly.

"An automatic system," he said and gave a small sigh. "Ancient
computers ranged in the bowels of the planet tick away the dark
millennia, and the ages hang heavy on their dusty data banks. I
think they take the occasional pot shot to relieve the monotony."

He looked gravely at Arthur and said, "I'm a great fan of science
you know."

"Oh ... er, really?" said Arthur, who was beginning to find the
man's curious, kindly manner disconcerting.

"Oh, yes," said the old man, and simply stopped talking again.

"Ah," said Arthur, "er ..." He had an odd felling of being like a
man in the act of adultery who is surprised when the woman's
husband wanders into the room, changes his trousers, passes a
few idle remarks about the weather and leaves again.

"You seem ill at ease," said the old man with polite concern.

"Er, no ... well, yes. Actually you see, we weren't really expecting
to find anybody about in fact. I sort of gathered that you were all
dead or something ..."

"Dead?" said the old man. "Good gracious no, we have but slept."

"Slept?" said Arthur incredulously.
                       160 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Yes, through the economic recession you see," said the old man,
apparently unconcerned about whether Arthur understood a
word he was talking about or not.

"Er, economic recession?"

"Well you see, five million years ago the Galactic economy
collapsed, and seeing that custom-made planets are something of
a luxury commodity you see ..."

He paused and looked at Arthur.

"You know we built planets do you?" he asked solemnly.

"Well yes," said Arthur, "I'd sort of gathered ..."

"Fascinating trade," said the old man, and a wistful look came
into his eyes, "doing the coastlines was always my favourite. Used
to have endless fun doing the little bits in fjords ... so anyway,"
he said trying to find his thread again, "the recession came and
we decided it would save us a lot of bother if we just slept
through it. So we programmed the computers to revive us when
it was all over."

The man stifled a very slight yawn and continued.

"The computers were index linked to the Galactic stock market
prices you see, so that we'd all be revived when everybody else
had rebuilt the economy enough to afford our rather expensive
services."

Arthur, a regular Guardian reader, was deeply shocked at this.

"That's a pretty unpleasant way to behave isn't it?"
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          161

"Is it?" asked the old man mildly. "I'm sorry, I'm a bit out of
touch."

He pointed down into the crater.

"Is that robot yours?" he said.

"No," came a thin metallic voice from the crater, "I'm mine."

"If you'd call it a robot," muttered Arthur. "It's more a sort of
electronic sulking machine."

"Bring it," said the old man. Arthur was quite surprised to hear a
note of decision suddenly present in the old man's voice. He
called to Marvin who crawled up the slope making a big show of
being lame, which he wasn't. "On second thoughts," said the old
man, "leave it here. You must come with me. Great things are
afoot." He turned towards his craft which, though no apparent
signal had been given, now drifted quietly towards them through
the dark.

Arthur looked down at Marvin, who now made an equally big
show of turning round laboriously and trudging off down into
the crater again muttering sour nothings to himself.

"Come," called the old man, "come now or you will be late."

"Late?" said Arthur. "What for?"

"What is your name, human?"

"Dent. Arthur Dent," said Arthur.

"Late, as in the late Dentarthurdent," said the old man, sternly.
"It's a sort of threat you see." Another wistful look came into his
                     162 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

tired old eyes. "I've never been very good at them myself, but
I'm told they can be very effective."

Arthur blinked at him.

"What an extraordinary person," he muttered to himself.

"I beg your pardon?" said the old man.

"Oh nothing, I'm sorry," said Arthur in embarrassment. "Alright,
where do we go?"

"In my aircar," said the old man motioning Arthur to get into the
craft which had settled silently next to them. "We are going deep
into the bowels of the planet where even now our race is being
revived from its five-million-year slumber. Magrathea awakes."

Arthur shivered involuntarily as he seated himself next to the old
man. The strangeness of it, the silent bobbing movement of the
craft as it soared into the night sky quite unsettled him.

He looked at the old man, his face illuminated by the dull glow of
tiny lights on the instrument panel.

"Excuse me," he said to him, "what is your name by the way?"

"My name?" said the old man, and the same distant sadness came
into his face again. He paused. "My name," he said, "... is
Slartibartfast."

Arthur practically choked.

"I beg your pardon?" he spluttered.

"Slartibartfast," repeated the old man quietly.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /        163

"Slartibartfast?"

The old man looked at him gravely. "I said it wasn't important,"
he said.

The aircar sailed through the night.
                     164 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

It is an important and popular fact that things are not always
what they seem. For instance, on the planet Earth, man had
always assumed that he was more intelligent than dolphins
because he had achieved so much - the wheel, New York, wars
and so on - whilst all the dolphins had ever done was muck about
in the water having a good time. But conversely, the dolphins
had always believed that they were far more intelligent than man
- for precisely the same reasons.

Curiously enough, the dolphins had long known of the
impending destruction of the planet Earth and had made many
attempts to alert mankind of the danger; but most of their
communications were misinterpreted as amusing attempts to
punch footballs or whistle for tidbits, so they eventually gave up
and left the Earth by their own means shortly before the Vogons
arrived.

The last ever dolphin message was misinterpreted as a
surprisingly sophisticated attempt to do a double-backwards-
somersault through a hoop whilst whistling the "Star Sprangled
Banner", but in fact the message was this: So long and thanks for
all the fish.

In fact there was only one species on the planet more intelligent
than dolphins, and they spent a lot of their time in behavioural
research laboratories running round inside wheels and
conducting frighteningly elegant and subtle experiments on
man.

The fact that once again man completely misinterpreted this
relationship was entirely according to these creatures' plans.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           165

Silently the aircar coasted through the cold darkness, a single soft
glow of light that was utterly alone in the deep Magrathean
night. It sped swiftly. Arthur's companion seemed sunk in his
own thoughts, and when Arthur tried on a couple of occasions to
engage him in conversation again he would simply reply by
asking if he was comfortable enough, and then left it at that.

Arthur tried to gauge the speed at which they were travelling,
but the blackness outside was absolute and he was denied any
reference points. The sense of motion was so soft and slight he
could almost believe they were hardly moving at all.

Then a tiny glow of light appeared in the far distance and within
seconds had grown so much in size that Arthur realized it was
travelling towards them at a colossal speed, and he tried to make
out what sort of craft it might be. He peered at it, but was unable
to discern any clear shape, and suddenly gasped in alarm as the
aircraft dipped sharply and headed downwards in what seemed
certain to be a collision course. Their relative velocity seemed
unbelievable, and Arthur had hardly time to draw breath before
it was all over. The next thing he was aware of was an insane
silver blur that seemed to surround him. He twisted his head
sharply round and saw a small black point dwindling rapidly in
the distance behind them, and it took him several seconds to
realize what had happened.

They had plunged into a tunnel in the ground. The colossal
speed had been their own relative to the glow of light which was
a stationary hole in the ground, the mouth of the tunnel. The
insane blur of silver was the circular wall of the tunnel down
which they were shooting, apparently at several hundred miles
an hour.

He closed his eyes in terror.
                      166 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

After a length of time which he made no attempt to judge, he
sensed a slight subsidence in their speed and some while later
became aware that they were gradually gliding to a gentle halt.

He opened his eyes again. They were still in the silver tunnel,
threading and weaving their way through what appeared to be a
crisscross warren of converging tunnels. When they finally
stopped it was in a small chamber of curved steel. Several
tunnels also had their terminus here, and at the farther end of
the chamber Arthur could see a large circle of dim irritating
light. It was irritating because it played tricks with the eyes, it
was impossible to focus on it properly or tell how near or far it
was. Arthur guessed (quite wrongly) that it might be ultra violet.

Slartibartfast turned and regarded Arthur with his solemn old
eyes.

"Earthman," he said, "we are now deep in the heart of
Magrathea."

"How did you know I was an Earthman?" demanded Arthur.

"These things will become clear to you," said the old man gently,
"at least," he added with slight doubt in his voice, "clearer than
they are at the moment."

He continued: "I should warn you that the chamber we are about
to pass into does not literally exist within our planet. It is a little
too ... large. We are about to pass through a gateway into a vast
tract of hyperspace. It may disturb you."

Arthur made nervous noises.

Slartibartfast touched a button and added, not entirely
reassuringly. "It scares the willies out of me. Hold tight."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /             167

The car shot forward straight into the circle of light, and
suddenly Arthur had a fairly clear idea of what infinity looked
like.

It wasn't infinity in fact.          Infinity itself looks flat and
uninteresting. Looking up into the night sky is looking into
infinity - distance is incomprehensible and therefore meaningless.
The chamber into which the aircar emerged was anything but
infinite, it was just very very big, so that it gave the impression of
infinity far better than infinity itself.

Arthur's senses bobbed and span, as, travelling at the immense
speed he knew the aircar attained, they climbed slowly through
the open air leaving the gateway through which they had passed
an invisible pinprick in the shimmering wall behind them.

The wall.

The wall defied the imagination - seduced it and defeated it. The
wall was so paralysingly vast and sheer that its top, bottom and
sides passed away beyond the reach of sight. The mere shock of
vertigo could kill a man.

The wall appeared perfectly flat. It would take the finest laser
measuring equipment to detect that as it climbed, apparently to
infinity, as it dropped dizzily away, as it planed out to either side,
it also curved. It met itself again thirteen light seconds away. In
other words the wall formed the inside of a hollow sphere, a
sphere over three million miles across and flooded with
unimaginable light.

"Welcome," said Slartibartfast as the tiny speck that was the
aircar, travelling now at three times the speed of sound, crept
                      168 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

imperceptibly forward into the mindboggling space, "welcome,"
he said, "to our factory floor."

Arthur stared about him in a kind of wonderful horror. Ranged
away before them, at distances he could neither judge nor even
guess at, were a series of curious suspensions, delicate traceries of
metal and light hung about shadowy spherical shapes that hung
in the space.

"This," said Slartibartfast, "is where we make most of our planets
you see."

"You mean," said Arthur, trying to form the words, "you mean
you're starting it all up again now?"

"No no, good heavens no," exclaimed the old man, "no, the
Galaxy isn't nearly rich enough to support us yet. No, we've been
awakened to perform just one extraordinary commission for very
... special clients from another dimension. It may interest you ...
there in the distance in front of us."

Arthur followed the old man's finger, till he was able to pick out
the floating structure he was pointing out. It was indeed the only
one of the many structures that betrayed any sign of activity
about it, though this was more a sublimal impression than
anything one could put one's finger on.

At the moment however a flash of light arced through the
structure and revealed in stark relief the patterns that were
formed on the dark sphere within. Patterns that Arthur knew,
rough blobby shapes that were as familiar to him as the shapes of
words, part of the furniture of his mind. For a few seconds he sat
in stunned silence as the images rushed around his mind and
tried to find somewhere to settle down and make sense. Part of
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          169

his brain told him that he knew perfectly well what he was
looking at and what the shapes represented whilst another quite
sensibly refused to countenance the idea and abdicated
responsibility for any further thinking in that direction.

The flash came again, and this time there could be no doubt.

"The Earth ..." whispered Arthur.

"Well, the Earth Mark Two in fact," said Slartibartfast cheery.
"We're making a copy from our original blueprints."

There was a pause.

"Are you trying to tell me," said Arthur, slowly and with control,
"that you originally ... made the Earth?"

"Oh yes," said Slartibartfast. "Did you ever go to a place ... I
think it was called Norway?"

"No," said Arthur, "no, I didn't."

"Pity," said Slartibartfast, "that was one of mine. Won an award
you know. Lovely crinkly edges. I was most upset to hear about
its destruction."

"You were upset!"

"Yes. Five minutes later and it wouldn't have mattered so much.
It was a quite shocking cock-up."

"Huh?" said Arthur.

"The mice were furious."

"The mice were furious?"
                      170 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Oh yes," said the old man mildly.

"Yes well so I expect were the dogs and cats and duckbilled
platypuses, but ..."

"Ah, but they hadn't paid for it you see, had they?"

"Look," said Arthur, "would it save you a lot of time if I just gave
up and went mad now?"

For a while the aircar flew on in awkward silence. Then the old
man tried patiently to explain.

"Earthman, the planet you lived on was commissioned, paid for,
and run by mice. It was destroyed five minutes before the
completion of the purpose for which it was built, and we've got to
build another one."

Only one word registered with Arthur.

"Mice?" he said. "Indeed Earthman."

"Look, sorry - are we talking about the little white furry things
with the cheese fixation and women standing on tables screaming
in early sixties sit coms?"

Slartibartfast coughed politely.

"Earthman," he said, "it is sometimes hard to follow your mode of
speech. Remember I have been asleep inside this planet of
Magrathea for five million years and know little of these early
sixties sit coms of which you speak. These creatures you call
mice, you see, they are not quite as they appear. They are
merely the protrusion into our dimension of vast hyperintelligent
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /              171

pan- dimensional beings. The whole business with the cheese
and the squeaking is just a front."

The old man paused, and with a sympathetic frown continued.

"They've been experimenting on you I'm afraid."

Arthur thought about this for a second, and then his face cleared.

"Ah no," he said, "I see the source of the misunderstanding now.
No, look you see, what happened was that we used to do
experiments on them. They were often used in behavioural
research, Pavlov and all that sort of stuff. So what happened was
hat the mice would be set all sorts of tests, learning to ring bells,
run around mazes and things so that the whole nature of the
learning process could be examined. From our observations of
their behaviour we were able to learn all sorts of things about our
own ..."

Arthur's voice tailed off.

"Such subtlety ..." said Slartibartfast, "one has to admire it."

"What?" said Arthur.

"How better to disguise their real natures, and how better to
guide your thinking. Suddenly running down a maze the wrong
way, eating the wrong bit of cheese, unexpectedly dropping dead
of myxomatosis, - if it's finely calculated the cumulative effect is
enormous."

He paused for effect.

"You see, Earthman, they really are particularly clever
hyperintelligent pan-dimensional beings. Your planet and
                       172 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

people have formed the matrix of an organic computer running
a ten- million-year research programme ...

"Let me tell you the whole story. It'll take a little time."

"Time," said Arthur weakly, "is not currently one of my
problems."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         173

There are of course many problems connected with life, of which
some of the most popular are Why are people born? Why do
they die? Why do they want to spend so much of the intervening
time wearing digital watches?

Many many millions of years ago a race of hyperintelligent pan-
dimensional beings (whose physical manifestation in their own
pan-dimensional universe is not dissimilar to our own) got so fed
up with the constant bickering about the meaning of life which
used to interrupt their favourite pastime of Brockian Ultra
Cricket (a curious game which involved suddenly hitting people
for no readily apparent reason and then running away) that they
decided to sit down and solve their problems once and for all.

And to this end they built themselves a stupendous super
computer which was so amazingly intelligent that even before the
data banks had been connected up it had started from I think
therefore I am and got as far as the existence of rice pudding and
income tax before anyone managed to turn it off.

It was the size of a small city.

Its main console was installed in a specially designed executive
office, mounted on an enormous executive desk of finest
ultramahagony topped with rich ultrared leather. The dark
carpeting was discreetly sumptuous, exotic pot plants and
tastefully engraved prints of the principal computer
programmers and their families were deployed liberally about
the room, and stately windows looked out upon a tree-lined
public square.

On the day of the Great On-Turning two soberly dressed
programmers with brief cases arrived and were shown discreetly
into the office. They were aware that this day they would
                     174 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

represent their entire race in its greatest moment, but they
conducted themselves calmly and quietly as they seated
themselves deferentially before the desk, opened their brief cases
and took out their leather-bound notebooks.

Their names were Lunkwill and Fook.

For a few moments they sat in respectful silence, then, after
exchanging a quiet glance with Fook, Lunkwill leaned forward
and touched a small black panel.

The subtlest of hums indicated that the massive computer was
now in total active mode. After a pause it spoke to them in a
voice rich resonant and deep.

It said: "What is this great task for which I, Deep Thought, the
second greatest computer in the Universe of Time and Space
have been called into existence?"

Lunkwill and Fook glanced at each other in surprise.

 "Your task, O Computer ..." began Fook. "No, wait a minute,
this isn't right," said Lunkwill, worried. "We distinctly designed
this computer to be the greatest one ever and we're not making
do with second best.        Deep Thought," he addressed the
computer, "are you not as we designed you to be, the greatest
most powerful computer in all time?"

"I described myself as the second greatest," intoned Deep
Thought, "and such I am."

Another worried look passed between the two programmers.
Lunkwill cleared his throat.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         175

"There must be some mistake," he said, "are you not a greatest
computer than the Milliard Gargantubrain which can count all
the atoms in a star in a millisecond?"

"The Milliard Gargantubrain?" said Deep Thought with
unconcealed contempt. "A mere abacus - mention it not."

"And are you not," said Fook leaning anxiously forward, "a
greater analyst than the Googleplex Star Thinker in the Seventh
Galaxy of Light and Ingenuity which can calculate the trajectory
of every single dust particle throughout a five-week Dangrabad
Beta sand blizzard?"

"A five-week sand blizzard?" said Deep Thought haughtily. "You
ask this of me who have contemplated the very vectors of the
atoms in the Big Bang itself? Molest me not with this pocket
calculator stuff."

The two programmers sat in uncomfortable silence for a
moment. Then Lunkwill leaned forward again.

"But are you not," he said, "a more fiendish disputant than the
Great Hyperlobic Omni-Cognate Neutron Wrangler of
Ciceronicus 12, the Magic and Indefatigable?"

"The Great Hyperlobic Omni-Cognate Neutron Wrangler," said
Deep Thought thoroughly rolling the r's, "could talk all four legs
off an Arcturan MegaDonkey - but only I could persuade it to go
for a walk afterwards."

"Then what," asked Fook, "is the problem?"

"There is no problem," said Deep Thought with magnificent
ringing tones. "I am simply the second greatest computer in the
Universe of Space and Time."
                     176 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"But the second?" insisted Lunkwill. "Why do you keep saying
the second? You're surely not thinking of the Multicorticoid
Perspicutron Titan Muller are you? Or the Pondermatic? Or the
..."

Contemptuous lights flashed across the computer's console.

"I spare not a single unit of thought on these cybernetic
simpletons!" he boomed. "I speak of none but the computer that
is to come after me!" Fook was losing patience. He pushed his
notebook aside and muttered, "I think this is getting needlessly
messianic."

"You know nothing of future time," pronounced Deep Thought,
"and yet in my teeming circuitry I can navigate the infinite delta
streams of future probability and see that there must one day
come a computer whose merest operational parameters I am not
worthy to calculate, but which it will be my fate eventually to
design."

Fook sighed heavily and glanced across to Lunkwill.

"Can we get on and ask the question?" he said.

Lunkwill motioned him to wait.

"What computer is this of which you speak?" he asked.

"I will speak of it no further in this present time," said Deep
Thought. "Now. Ask what else of me you will that I may
function. Speak."

They shrugged at each other. Fook composed himself.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          177

"O Deep Thought Computer," he said, "the task we have
designed you to perform is this. We want you to tell us ..." he
paused, "... the Answer!"

"The answer?" said Deep Thought. "The answer to what?"

"Life!" urged Fook.

"The Universe!" said Lunkwill.

"Everything!" they said in chorus.

Deep Thought paused for a moment's reflection.

"Tricky," he said finally. "But can you do it?"

Again, a significant pause.

"Yes," said Deep Thought, "I can do it."

"There is an answer?" said Fook with breathless excitement."

"A simple answer?" added Lunkwill.

"Yes," said Deep Thought. "Life, the Universe, and Everything.
There is an answer. But," he added, "I'll have to think about it."

A sudden commotion destroyed the moment: the door flew open
and two angry men wearing the coarse faded-blue robes and
belts of the Cruxwan University burst into the room, thrusting
aside the ineffectual flunkies who tried to bar their way. "We
demand admission!" shouted the younger of the two men
elbowing a pretty young secretary in the throat.

"Come on," shouted the older one, "you can't keep us out!" He
pushed a junior programmer back through the door.
                     178 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"We demand that you can't keep us out!" bawled the younger
one, though he was now firmly inside the room and no further
attempts were being made to stop him.

"Who are you?" said Lunkwill, rising angrily from his seat. "What
do you want?"

"I am Majikthise!" announced the older one.

"And I demand that I am Vroomfondel!" shouted the younger
one.

Majikthise turned on Vroomfondel. "It's alright," he explained
angrily, "you don't need to demand that."

"Alright!" bawled Vroomfondel banging on an nearby desk. "I
am Vroomfondel, and that is not a demand, that is a solid fact!
What we demand is solid facts!"

"No we don't!" exclaimed Majikthise in irritation.        "That is
precisely what we don't demand!"

Scarcely pausing for breath, Vroomfondel shouted, "We don't
demand solid facts! What we demand is a total absence of solid
facts. I demand that I may or may not be Vroomfondel!"

"But who the devil are you?" exclaimed an outraged Fook.

"We," said Majikthise, "are Philosophers."

"Though we may not be," said Vroomfondel waving a warning
finger at the programmers.

"Yes we are," insisted Majikthise. "We are quite definitely here as
representatives of the Amalgamated Union of Philosophers,
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         179

Sages, Luminaries and Other Thinking Persons, and we want
this machine off, and we want it off now!"

"What's the problem?" said Lunkwill.

"I'll tell you what the problem is mate," said Majikthise,
"demarcation, that's the problem!"

"We demand," yelled Vroomfondel, "that demarcation may or
may not be the problem!"

"You just let the machines get on with the adding up," warned
Majikthise, "and we'll take care of the eternal verities thank you
very much. You want to check your legal position you do mate.
Under law the Quest for Ultimate Truth is quite clearly the
inalienable prerogative of your working thinkers. Any bloody
machine goes and actually finds it and we're straight out of a job
aren't we? I mean what's the use of our sitting up half the night
arguing that there may or may not be a God if this machine only
goes and gives us his bleeding phone number the next morning?"

"That's right!" shouted Vroomfondel, "we demand rigidly defined
areas of doubt and uncertainty!"

Suddenly a stentorian voice boomed across the room.

"Might I make an observation at this point?" inquired Deep
Thought.

"We'll go on strike!" yelled Vroomfondel.

"That's right!" agreed Majikthise.      "You'll have a national
Philosopher's strike on your hands!"
                       180 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

The hum level in the room suddenly increased as several
ancillary bass driver units, mounted in sedately carved and
varnished cabinet speakers around the room, cut in to give Deep
Thought's voice a little more power.

"All I wanted to say," bellowed the computer, "is that my circuits
are now irrevocably committed to calculating the answer to the
Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and Everything -" he
paused and satisfied himself that he now had everyone's
attention, before continuing more quietly, "but the programme
will take me a little while to run."

Fook glanced impatiently at his watch.

"How long?" he said.

"Seven and a half million years," said Deep Thought.

Lunkwill and Fook blinked at each other.

"Seven and a half million years ...!" they cried in chorus.

"Yes," declaimed Deep Thought, "I said I'd have to think about it,
didn't I? And it occurs to me that running a programme like this
is bound to create an enormous amount of popular publicity for
the whole area of philosophy in general. Everyone's going to
have their own theories about what answer I'm eventually to
come up with, and who better to capitalize on that media market
than you yourself? So long as you can keep disagreeing with each
other violently enough and slagging each other off in the popular
press, you can keep yourself on the gravy train for life. How
does that sound?"

The two philosophers gaped at him.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          181

"Bloody hell," said Majikthise, "now that is what I call thinking.
Here Vroomfondel, why do we never think of things like that?"

"Dunno," said Vroomfondel in an awed whisper, "think our
brains must be too highly trained Majikthise."

So saying, they turned on their heels and walked out of the door
and into a lifestyle beyond their wildest dreams.
                     182 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Yes, very salutary," said Arthur, after Slartibartfast had related
the salient points of the story to him, "but I don't understand
what all this has got to do with the Earth and mice and things."

"That is but the first half of the story Earthman," said the old
man. "If you would care to discover what happened seven and a
half millions later, on the great day of the Answer, allow me to
invite you to my study where you can experience the events
yourself on our Sens-O-Tape records. That is unless you would
care to take a quick stroll on the surface of New Earth. It's only
half completed I'm afraid - we haven't even finished burying the
artificial dinosaur skeletons in the crust yet, then we have the
Tertiary and Quarternary Periods of the Cenozoic Era to lay
down, and ..."

"No thank you," said Arthur, "it wouldn't be quite the same."

"No," said Slartibartfast, "it won't be," and he turned the aircar
round and headed back towards the mind-numbing wall.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          183

Slartibartfast's study was a total mess, like the results of an
explosion in a public library. The old man frowned as they
stepped in.

"Terribly unfortunate," he said, "a diode blew in one of the life-
support computers. When we tried to revive our cleaning staff
we discovered they'd been dead for nearly thirty thousand years.
Who's going to clear away the bodies, that's what I want to know.
Look why don't you sit yourself down over there and let me plug
you in?"

He gestured Arthur towards a chair which looked as if it had
been made out of the rib cage of a stegosaurus.

"It was made out of the rib cage of a stegosaurus," explained the
old man as he pottered about fishing bits of wire out from under
tottering piles of paper and drawing instruments. "Here," he
said, "hold these," and passed a couple of stripped wire end to
Arthur.

The instant he took hold of them a bird flew straight through
him.

He was suspended in mid-air and totally invisible to himself.
Beneath him was a pretty treelined city square, and all around it
as far as the eye could see were white concrete buildings of airy
spacious design but somewhat the worse for wear - many were
cracked and stained with rain. Today however the sun was
shining, a fresh breeze danced lightly through the trees, and the
odd sensation that all the buildings were quietly humming was
probably caused by the fact that the square and all the streets
around it were thronged with cheerful excited people.
Somewhere a band was playing, brightly coloured flags were
fluttering in the breeze and the spirit of carnival was in the air.
                     184 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Arthur felt extraordinarily lonely stuck up in the air above it all
without so much as a body to his name, but before he had time to
reflect on this a voice rang out across the square and called for
everyone's attention.

A man standing on a brightly dressed dais before the building
which clearly dominated the square was addressing the crowd
over a Tannoy.

"O people waiting in the Shadow of Deep Thought!" he cried out.
"Honoured Descendants of Vroomfondel and Majikthise, the
Greatest and Most Truly Interesting Pundits the Universe has
ever known ... The Time of Waiting is over!"

Wild cheers broke out amongst the crowd. Flags, streamers and
wolf whistles sailed through the air. The narrower streets looked
rather like centipedes rolled over on their backs and frantically
waving their legs in the air.

"Seven and a half million years our race has waited for this Great
and Hopefully Enlightening Day!" cried the cheer leader. "The
Day of the Answer!"

Hurrahs burst from the ecstatic crowd.

"Never again," cried the man, "never again will we wake up in the
morning and think Who am I? What is my purpose in life? Does
it really, cosmically speaking, matter if I don't get up and go to
work? For today we will finally learn once and for all the plain
and simple answer to all these nagging little problems of Life, the
Universe and Everything!"

As the crowd erupted once again, Arthur found himself gliding
through the air and down towards one of the large stately
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         185

windows on the first floor of the building behind the dais from
which the speaker was addressing the crowd.

He experienced a moment's panic as he sailed straight through
towards the window, which passed when a second or so later he
found he had gone right through the solid glass without
apparently touching it.

No one in the room remarked on his peculiar arrival, which is
hardly surprising as he wasn't there. He began to realize that the
whole experience was merely a recorded projection which
knocked six-track seventy-millimetre into a cocked hat.

The room was much as Slartibartfast had described it. In seven
and a half million years it had been well looked after and cleaned
regularly every century or so. The ultramahagony desk was
worn at the edges, the carpet a little faded now, but the large
computer terminal sat in sparkling glory on the desk's leather
top, as bright as if it had been constructed yesterday. Two
severely dressed men sat respectfully before the terminal and
waited.

"The time is nearly upon us," said one, and Arthur was surprised
to see a word suddenly materialize in thin air just by the man's
neck. The word was Loonquawl, and it flashed a couple of times
and the disappeared again. Before Arthur was able to assimilate
this the other man spoke and the word Phouchg appeared by his
neck.

"Seventy-five thousand generations ago, our ancestors set this
program in motion," the second man said, "and in all that time
we will be the first to hear the computer speak."
                        186 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"An awesome prospect, Phouchg," agreed the first man, and
Arthur suddenly realized that he was watching a recording with
subtitles.

"We are the ones who will hear," said Phouchg, "the answer to the
great question of Life ...!"

"The Universe ...!" said Loonquawl.

"And Everything ...!"

"Shhh," said Loonquawl with a slight gesture, "I think Deep
Thought is preparing to speak!"

There was a moment's expectant pause whilst panels slowly came
to life on the front of the console. Lights flashed on and off
experimentally and settled down into a businesslike pattern. A
soft low hum came from the communication channel.

"Good morning," said Deep Thought at last.

"Er ... Good morning, O Deep Thought," said Loonquawl
nervously, "do you have ... er, that is ..."

"An answer for you?" interrupted Deep Thought majestically.
"Yes. I have."

The two men shivered with expectancy. Their waiting had not
been in vain.

"There really is one?" breathed Phouchg.

"There really is one," confirmed Deep Thought.

"To Everything? To the great Question of Life, the Universe and
Everything?"
         THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /       187

"Yes."

Both of the men had been trained for this moment, their lives
had been a preparation for it, they had been selected at birth as
those who would witness the answer, but even so they found
themselves gasping and squirming like excited children.

"And you're ready to give it to us?" urged Loonquawl. "I am."

"Now?"

"Now," said Deep Thought.

They both licked their dry lips.

"Though I don't think," added Deep Thought, "that you're going
to like it."

"Doesn't matter!" said Phouchg. "We must know it! Now!"

"Now?" inquired Deep Thought.

"Yes! Now ..."

"Alright," said the computer and settled into silence again. The
two men fidgeted. The tension was unbearable.

"You're really not going to like it," observed Deep Thought.

"Tell us!"

"Alright," said Deep Thought.       "The Answer to the Great
Question ..."

"Yes ...!"

"Of Life, the Universe and Everything ..." said Deep Thought.
                     188 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Yes ...!" "Is ..." said Deep Thought, and paused.

"Yes ...!"

"Is ..."

"Yes ...!!!...?"

"Forty-two," said Deep Thought, with infinite majesty and calm.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           189

It was a long time before anyone spoke.

Out of the corner of his eye Phouchg could see the sea of tense
expectant faces down in the square outside.

"We're going to get lynched aren't we?" he whispered.

"It was a tough assignment," said Deep Thought mildly.

"Forty-two!" yelled Loonquawl. "Is that all you've got to show for
seven and a half million years' work?" "I checked it very
thoroughly," said the computer, "and that quite definitely is the
answer. I think the problem, to be quite honest with you, is that
you've never actually known what the question is."

"But it was the Great Question! The Ultimate Question of Life,
the Universe and Everything!" howled Loonquawl.

"Yes," said Deep Thought with the air of one who suffers fools
gladly, "but what actually is it?"

A slow stupefied silence crept over the men as they stared at the
computer and then at each other.

"Well, you know, it's just Everything ... Everything ..." offered
Phouchg weakly.

"Exactly!" said Deep Thought. "So once you do know what the
question actually is, you'll know what the answer means."

"Oh terrific," muttered Phouchg flinging aside his notebook and
wiping away a tiny tear.

"Look, alright, alright," said Loonquawl, "can you just please tell
us the Question?"
                      190 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"The Ultimate Question?"

"Yes!"

"Of Life, the Universe, and Everything?"

"Yes!"

Deep Thought pondered this for a moment.

"Tricky," he said.

"But can you do it?" cried Loonquawl.

Deep Thought pondered this for another long moment.

Finally: "No," he said firmly.

Both men collapsed on to their chairs in despair.

"But I'll tell you who can," said Deep Thought.

They both looked up sharply.

"Who?" "Tell us!"

Suddenly Arthur began to feel his apparently non-existent scalp
begin to crawl as he found himself moving slowly but inexorably
forward towards the console, but it was only a dramatic zoom on
the part of whoever had made the recording he assumed.

"I speak of none other than the computer that is to come after
me," intoned Deep Thought, his voice regaining its accustomed
declamatory tones. "A computer whose merest operational
parameters I am not worthy to calculate - and yet I will design it
for you. A computer which can calculate the Question to the
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /             191

Ultimate Answer, a computer of such infinite and subtle
complexity that organic life itself shall form part of its operational
matrix. And you yourselves shall take on new forms and go
down into the computer to navigate its ten-million-year program!
Yes! I shall design this computer for you. And I shall name it
also unto you. And it shall be called ... The Earth."

Phouchg gaped at Deep Thought.

"What a dull name," he said and great incisions appeared down
the length of his body. Loonquawl too suddenly sustained
horrific gashed from nowhere. The Computer console blotched
and cracked, the walls flickered and crumbled and the room
crashed upwards into its own ceiling ...

Slartibartfast was standing in front of Arthur holding the two
wires.

"End of the tape," he explained.
                          192 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Zaphod! Wake up!"

"Mmmmmwwwwwerrrrr?"

"Hey come on, wake up."

"Just let me stick to what I'm good at, yeah?" muttered Zaphod
and rolled away from the voice back to sleep.

"Do you want me to kick you?" said Ford.

"Would it give you a lot of pleasure?" said Zaphod, blearily.

"No."

"Nor me. So what's the point? Stop bugging me." Zaphod curled
himself up.

"He got a double dose of the gas," said Trillian looking down at
him, "two windpipes."

"And stop talking," said Zaphod, "it's hard enough trying to sleep
anyway. What's the matter with the ground? It's all cold and
hard."

"It's gold," said Ford.

With an amazingly balletic movement Zaphod was standing and
scanning the horizon, because that was how far the gold ground
stretched in every direction, perfectly smooth and solid. It
gleamed like ... it's impossible to say what it gleamed like because
nothing in the Universe gleams in quite the same way that a
planet of solid gold does. "Who put all that there?" yelped
Zaphod, goggle-eyed.

"Don't get excited," said Ford, "it's only a catalogue."
          THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /        193

"A who?"

"A catalogue," said Trillian, "an illusion."

"How can you say that?" cried Zaphod, falling to his hands and
knees and staring at the ground. He poked it and prodded it
with his fingernail. It was very heavy and very slightly soft - he
could mark it with his fingernail. It was very yellow and very
shiny, and when he breathed on it his breath evaporated off it in
that very peculiar and special way that breath evaporates off solid
gold.

"Trillian and I came round a while ago," said Ford. "We shouted
and yelled till somebody came and then carried on shouting and
yelling till they got fed up and put us in their planet catalogue to
keep us busy till they were ready to deal with us. This is all Sens-
O-Tape."

Zaphod stared at him bitterly.

"Ah, shit," he said, "you wake me up from my own perfectly good
dream to show me somebody else's." He sat down in a huff.

"What's that series of valleys over there?" he said.

"Hallmark," said Ford. "We had a look."

"We didn't wake you earlier," said Trillian. "The last planet was
knee deep in fish."

"Fish?"

"Some people like the oddest things."

"And before that," said Ford, "we had platinum. Bit dull. We
thought you'd like to see this one though."
                     194 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Seas of light glared at them in one solid blaze wherever they
looked.

"Very pretty," said Zaphod petulantly.

In the sky a huge green catalogue number appeared. It flickered
and changed, and when they looked around again so had the
land.

As with one voice they all went, "Yuch."

The sea was purple. The beach they were on was composed of
tiny yellow and green pebbles - presumably terribly precious
stones.    The mountains in the distance seemed soft and
undulating with red peaks. Nearby stood a solid silver beach
table with a frilly mauve parasol and silver tassles.

In the sky a huge sign appeared, replacing the catalogue
number. It said, Whatever your tastes, Magrathea can cater for
you. We are not proud.

And five hundred entirely naked women dropped out of the sky
on parachutes.

In a moment the scene vanished and left them in a springtime
meadow full of cows.

"Ow!" said Zaphod. "My brains!"

"You want to talk about it?" said Ford.

"Yeah, OK," said Zaphod, and all three sat down and ignored the
scenes that came and went around them.

"I figure this," said Zaphod. "Whatever happened to my mind, I
did it. And I did it in such a way that it wouldn't be detected by
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /        195

the government screening tests. And I wasn't to know anything
about it myself. Pretty crazy, right?"

The other two nodded in agreement.

"So I reckon, what's so secret that I can't let anybody know I
know it, not the Galactic Government, not even myself? And the
answer is I don't know. Obviously. But I put a few things
together and I can begin to guess. When did I decide to run for
President? Shortly after the death of President Yooden Vranx.
You remember Yooden, Ford?"

"Yeah," said Ford, "he was that guy we met when we were kids,
the Arcturan captain. He was a gas. He gave us conkers when
you bust your way into his megafreighter. Said you were the
most amazing kid he'd ever met."

"What's all this?" said Trillian.

"Ancient history," said Ford, "when we were kids together on
Betelgeuse. The Arcturan megafreighters used to carry most of
the bulky trade between the Galactic Centre and the outlying
regions The Betelgeuse trading scouts used to find the markets
and the Arcturans would supply them. There was a lot of trouble
with space pirates before they were wiped out in the Dordellis
wars, and the megafreighters had to be equipped with the most
fantastic defence shields known to Galactic science. They were
real brutes of ships, and huge. In orbit round a planet they
would eclipse the sun.

"One day, young Zaphod here decides to raid one. On a tri-jet
scooter designed for stratosphere work, a mere kid. I mean
forget it, it was crazier than a mad monkey. I went along for the
ride because I'd got some very safe money on him not doing it,
                     196 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

and didn't want him coming back with fake evidence. So what
happens? We got in his tri-jet which he had souped up into
something totally other, crossed three parsecs in a matter of
weeks, bust our way into a megafreighter I still don't know how,
marched on to the bridge waving toy pistols and demanded
conkers. A wilder thing I have not known. Lost me a year's
pocket money. For what? Conkers." "The captain was this really
amazing guy, Yooden Vranx," said Zaphod. "He gave us food,
booze - stuff from really weird parts of the Galaxy - lots of
conkers of course, and we had just the most incredible time.
Then he teleported us back. Into the maximum security wing of
Betelgeuse state prison. He was a cool guy. Went on to become
President of the Galaxy."

Zaphod paused.

The scene around them was currently plunged into gloom. Dark
mists swirled round them and elephantine shapes lurked
indistinctly in the shadows. The air was occasionally rent with
the sounds of illusory beings murdering other illusory beings.
Presumably enough people must have liked this sort of thing to
make it a paying proposition.

"Ford," said Zaphod quietly.

"Yeah?"

"Just before Yooden died he came to see me."

"What? You never told me."

"No."

"What did he say? What did he come to see you about?"
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         197

"He told me about the Heart of Gold. It was his idea that I
should steal it."

"His idea?"

"Yeah," said Zaphod, "and the only possible way of stealing it was
to be at the launching ceremony."

Ford gaped at him in astonishment for a moment, and then
roared with laughter.

"Are you telling me," he said, "that you set yourself up to become
President of the Galaxy just to steal that ship?"

"That's it," said Zaphod with the sort of grin that would get most
people locked away in a room with soft walls.

"But why?" said Ford. "What's so important about having it?"

"Dunno," said Zaphod, "I think if I'd consciously known what was
so important about it and what I would need it for it would have
showed up on the brain screening tests and I would never have
passed. I think Yooden told me a lot of things that are still
locked away."

"So you think you went and mucked about inside your own brain
as a result of Yooden talking to you?"

"He was a hell of a talker." "Yeah, but Zaphod old mate, you want
to look after yourself you know."

Zaphod shrugged.

"I mean, don't you have any inkling of the reasons for all this?"
asked Ford.
                      198 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

Zaphod thought hard about this and doubts seemed to cross his
minds.

"No," he said at last, "I don't seem to be letting myself into any of
my secrets. Still," he added on further reflection, "I can
understand that. I wouldn't trust myself further than I could spit
a rat."

A moment later, the last planet in the catalogue vanished from
beneath them and the solid world resolved itself again.

They were sitting in a plush waiting room full of glass-top tables
and design awards.

A tall Magrathean man was standing in front of them.

"The mice will see you now," he said.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          199

"So there you have it," said Slartibartfast, making a feeble and
perfunctory attempt to clear away some of the appalling mess of
his study. He picked up a paper from the top of a pile, but then
couldn't think of anywhere else to put it, so he but it back on top
of the original pile which promptly fell over. "Deep Thought
designed the Earth, we built it and you lived on it."

"And the Vogons came and destroyed it five minutes before the
program was completed," added Arthur, not unbitterly.

"Yes," said the old man, pausing to gaze hopelessly round the
room. "Ten million years of planning and work gone just like
that. Ten million years, Earthman ... can you conceive of that
kind of time span? A galactic civilization could grow from a single
worm five times over in that time. Gone." He paused.

"Well that's bureaucracy for you," he added.

"You know," said Arthur thoughtfully, "all this explains a lot of
things. All through my life I've had this strange unaccountable
feeling that something was going on in the world, something big,
even sinister, and no one would tell me what it was."

"No," said the old man, "that's just perfectly normal paranoia.
Everyone in the Universe has that."

"Everyone?" said Arthur. "Well, if everyone has that perhaps it
means something! Perhaps somewhere outside the Universe we
know ..." "Maybe. Who cares?" said Slartibartfast before Arthur
got too excited. "Perhaps I'm old and tired," he continued, "but I
always think that the chances of finding out what really is going
on are so absurdly remote that the only thing to do is to say hang
the sense of it and just keep yourself occupied. Look at me: I
design coastlines. I got an award for Norway."
                     200 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

He rummaged around in a pile of debris and pulled out a large
perspex block with his name on it and a model of Norway
moulded into it.

"Where's the sense in that?" he said. "None that I've been able to
make out. I've been doing fjords in all my life. For a fleeting
moment they become fashionable and I get a major award."

He turned it over in his hands with a shrug and tossed it aside
carelessly, but not so carelessly that it didn't land on something
soft.

"In this replacement Earth we're building they've given me Africa
to do and of course I'm doing it with all fjords again because I
happen to like them, and I'm old fashioned enough to think that
they give a lovely baroque feel to a continent. And they tell me
it's not equatorial enough. Equatorial!" He gave a hollow laugh.
"What does it matter? Science has achieved some wonderful
things of course, but I'd far rather be happy than right any day."

"And are you?"

"No. That's where it all falls down of course."

"Pity," said Arthur with sympathy. "It sounded like quite a good
lifestyle otherwise."

Somewhere on the wall a small white light flashed.

"Come," said Slartibartfast, "you are to meet the mice. Your
arrival on the planet has caused considerable excitement. It has
already been hailed, so I gather, as the third most improbable
event in the history of the Universe."

"What were the first two?"
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           201

"Oh, probably just coincidences," said Slartibartfast carelessly. He
opened the door and stood waiting for Arthur to follow.

Arthur glanced around him once more, and then down at
himself, at the sweaty dishevelled clothes he had been lying in the
mud in on Thursday morning.

"I seem to be having tremendous difficulty with my lifestyle," he
muttered to himself.

"I beg your pardon?" said the old man mildly.

"Oh nothing," said Arthur, "only joking."
                      202 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

It is of course well known that careless talk costs lives, but the full
scale of the problem is not always appreciated.

For instance, at the very moment that Arthur said "I seem to be
having tremendous difficulty with my lifestyle," a freak wormhole
opened up in the fabric of the space-time continuum and carried
his words far far back in time across almost infinite reaches of
space to a distant Galaxy where strange and warlike beings were
poised on the brink of frightful interstellar battle.

The two opposing leaders were meeting for the last time.

A dreadful silence fell across the conference table as the
commander of the Vl'hurgs, resplendent in his black jewelled
battle shorts, gazed levelly at the G'Gugvuntt leader squatting
opposite him in a cloud of green sweet-smelling steam, and, with
a million sleek and horribly beweaponed star cruisers poised to
unleash electric death at his single word of command, challenged
the vile creature to take back what it had said about his mother.

The creature stirred in his sickly broiling vapour, and at that very
moment the words I seem to be having tremendous difficulty
with my lifestyle drifted across the conference table.

Unfortunately, in the Vl'hurg tongue this was the most dreadful
insult imaginable, and there was nothing for it but to wage
terrible war for centuries.

Eventually of course, after their Galaxy had been decimated over
a few thousand years, it was realized that the whole thing had
been a ghastly mistake, and so the two opposing battle fleets
settled their few remaining differences in order to launch a joint
attack on our own Galaxy - now positively identified as the source
of the offending remark.
        THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         203

For thousands more years the mighty ships tore across the empty
wastes of space and finally dived screaming on to the first planet
they came across - which happened to be the Earth - where due
to a terrible miscalculation of scale the entire battle fleet was
accidentally swallowed by a small dog.

Those who study the complex interplay of cause and effect in the
history of the Universe say that this sort of thing is going on all
the time, but that we are powerless to prevent it.

"It's just life," they say.

A short aircar trip brought Arthur and the old Magrathean to a
doorway. They left the car and went through the door into a
waiting room full of glass-topped tables and perspex awards.
Almost immediately, a light flashed above the door at the other
side of the room and they entered.

"Arthur! You're safe!" a voice cried.

"Am I?" said Arthur, rather startled. "Oh good."

The lighting was rather subdued and it took him a moment or so
to see Ford, Trillian and Zaphod sitting round a large table
beautifully decked out with exotic dishes, strange sweetmeats and
bizarre fruits. They were stuffing their faces.

"What happened to you?" demanded Arthur.

"Well," said Zaphod, attacking a boneful of grilled muscle, "our
guests here have been gassing us and zapping our minds and
being generally weird and have now given us a rather nice meal
to make it up to us. Here," he said hoiking out a lump of evil
smelling meat from a bowl, "have some Vegan Rhino's cutlet. It's
delicious if you happen to like that sort of thing."
                        204 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Hosts?" said Arthur. "What hosts? I don't see any ..."

A small voice said, "Welcome to lunch, Earth creature."

Arthur glanced around and suddenly yelped.

"Ugh!" he said. "There are mice on the table!"

There was an awkward silence as everyone looked pointedly at
Arthur.

He was busy staring at two white mice sitting in what looked like
whisky glasses on the table. He heard the silence and glanced
around at everyone.

"Oh!" he said, with sudden realization. "Oh, I'm sorry, I wasn't
quite prepared for ..."

"Let me introduce you," said Trillian.       "Arthur this is Benji
mouse."

"Hi," said one of the mice. His whiskers stroked what must have
been a touch sensitive panel on the inside of the whisky-glass like
affair, and it moved forward slightly.

"And this is Frankie mouse."

The other mouse said, "Pleased to meet you," and did likewise.

Arthur gaped.

"But aren't they ..."

"Yes," said Trillian, "they are the mice I brought with me from
the Earth."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /            205

She looked him in the eye and Arthur thought he detected the
tiniest resigned shrug.

"Could you pass me that bowl of grated Arcturan Megadonkey?"
she said.

Slartibartfast coughed politely. "Er, excuse me," he said. "Yes,
thank you Slartibartfast," said Benji mouse sharply, "you may go."

"What? Oh ... er, very well," said the old man, slightly taken
aback, "I'll just go and get on with some of my fjords then."

"Ah, well in fact that won't be necessary," said Frankie mouse. "It
looks very much as if we won't be needing the new Earth any
longer." He swivelled his pink little eyes. "Not now that we have
found a native of the planet who was there seconds before it was
destroyed."

"What?" cried Slartibartfast, aghast. "You can't mean that! I've
got a thousand glaciers poised and ready to roll over Africa!"

"Well perhaps you can take a quick skiing holiday before you
dismantle them," said Frankie, acidly.

"Skiing holiday!" cried the old man. "Those glaciers are works of
art! Elegantly sculptured contours, soaring pinnacles of ice, deep
majestic ravines! It would be sacrilege to go skiing on high art!"

"Thank you Slartibartfast," said Benji firmly. "That will be all."

"Yes sir," said the old man coldly, "thank you very much. Well,
goodbye Earthman," he said to Arthur, "hope the lifestyle comes
together."
                     206 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

With a brief nod to the rest of the company he turned and
walked sadly out of the room.

Arthur stared after him not knowing what to say.

"Now," said Benji mouse, "to business."

Ford and Zaphod clinked their glasses together.

"To business!" they said.

"I beg your pardon?" said Benji.

Ford looked round.

"Sorry, I thought you were proposing a toast," he said.

The two mice scuttled impatiently around in their glass
transports. Finally they composed themselves, and Benji moved
forward to address Arthur.

"Now, Earth creature," he said, "the situation we have in effect is
this. We have, as you know, been more or less running your
planet for the last ten million years in order to find this wretched
thing called the Ultimate Question."

"Why?" said Arthur, sharply.

"No - we already thought of that one," said Frankie interrupting,
"but it doesn't fit the answer. Why? - Forty-Two ... you see, it
doesn't work."

"No," said Arthur, "I mean why have you been doing it?"

"Oh, I see," said Frankie. "Well, eventually just habit I think, to
be brutally honest. And this is more or less the point - we're sick
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          207

to the teeth with the whole thing, and the prospect of doing it all
over again on account of those whinnet-ridden Vogons quite
frankly gives me the screaming heeby jeebies, you know what I
mean? It was by the merest lucky chance that Benji and I
finished our particular job and left the planet early for a quick
holiday, and have since manipulated our way back to Magrathea
by the good offices of your friends."

"Magrathea is a gateway back to our own dimension," put in
Benji.

"Since when," continued his murine colleague, "we have had an
offer of a quite enormously fat contract to do the 5D chat show
and lecture circuit back in our own dimensional neck of the
woods, and we're very much inclined to take it."

"I would, wouldn't you Ford?" said Zaphod promptingly.

"Oh yes," said Ford, "jump at it, like a shot."

Arthur glanced at them, wondering what all this was leading up
to.

"But we've got to have a product you see," said Frankie, "I mean
ideally we still need the Ultimate Question in some form or
other."

Zaphod leaned forward to Arthur.

"You see," he said, "if they're just sitting there in the studio
looking very relaxed and, you know, just mentioning that they
happen to know the Answer to Life, the Universe and
Everything, and then eventually have to admit that in fact it's
Forty-two, then the show's probably quite short. No follow-up,
you see."
                      208 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"We have to have something that sounds good," said Benji.

"Something that sounds good?" exclaimed Arthur. "An Ultimate
Question that sounds good? From a couple of mice?"

The mice bristled.

"Well, I mean, yes idealism, yes the dignity of pure research, yes
the pursuit of truth in all its forms, but there comes a point I'm
afraid where you begin to suspect that if there's any real truth, it's
that the entire multi-dimensional infinity of the Universe is
almost certainly being run by a bunch of maniacs. And if it
comes to a choice between spending yet another ten million years
finding that out, and on the other hand just taking the money
and running, then I for one could do with the exercise," said
Frankie.

"But ..." started Arthur, hopelessly. "Hey, will you get this,
Earthman," interrupted Zaphod. "You are a last generation
product of that computer matrix, right, and you were there right
up to the moment your planet got the finger, yeah?"

"Er ..."

"So your brain was an organic part of the penultimate
configuration of the computer programme," said Ford, rather
lucidly he thought.

"Right?" said Zaphod.

"Well," said Arthur doubtfully. He wasn't aware of ever having
felt an organic part of anything. He had always seen this as one
of his problems.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /              209

"In other words," said Benji, steering his curious little vehicle
right over to Arthur, "there's a good chance that the structure of
the question is encoded in the structure of your brain - so we
want to buy it off you."

"What, the question?" said Arthur.

"Yes," said Ford and Trillian.

"For lots of money," said Zaphod.

"No, no," said Frankie, "it's the brain we want to buy."

"What!"

"I thought you said you could just read his brain electronical\-ly,"
pro\-tes\-ted Ford.

"Oh yes," said Frankie, "but we'd have to get it out first. It's got to
be prepared."

"Treated," said Benji.

"Diced."

"Thank you," shouted Arthur, tipping up his chair and backing
away from the table in horror.

"It could always be replaced," said Benji reasonably, "if you think
it's important."

"Yes, an electronic brain," said Frankie, "a simple one would
suffice."

"A simple one!" wailed Arthur. "Yeah," said Zaphod with a
sudden evil grin, "you'd just have to program it to say What? and
                      210 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

I don't understand and Where's the tea? - who'd know the
difference?"

"What?" cried Arthur, backing away still further. "See what I
mean?" said Zaphod and howled with pain because of something
that Trillian did at that moment.

"I'd notice the difference," said Arthur.

"No you wouldn't," said Frankie mouse, "you'd be programmed
not to."

Ford made for the door.

"Look, I'm sorry, mice old lads," he said. "I don't think we've got
a deal."

"I rather think we have to have a deal," said the mice in chorus,
all the charm vanishing fro their piping little voices in an instant.
With a tiny whining shriek their two glass transports lifted
themselves off the table, and swung through the air towards
Arthur, who stumbled further backwards into a blind corner,
utterly unable to cope or think of anything.

Trillian grabbed him desperately by the arm and tried to drag
him towards the door, which Ford and Zaphod were struggling
to open, but Arthur was dead weight - he seemed hypnotized by
the airborne rodents swooping towards him.

She screamed at him, but he just gaped.

With one more yank, Ford and Zaphod got the door open. On
the other side of it was a small pack of rather ugly men who they
could only assume were the heavy mob of Magrathea. Not only
      THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /        211

were they ugly themselves, but the medical equipment they
carried with them was also far from pretty. They charged.

So - Arthur was about to have his head cut open, Trillian was
unable to help him, and Ford and Zaphod were about to be set
upon by several thugs a great deal heavier and more sharply
armed than they were.

All in all it was extremely fortunate that at that moment every
alarm on the planet burst into an earsplitting din.
                      212 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Emergency! Emergency!" blared the klaxons throughout Ma\-
gra\-thea. "Hos\-tile ship has landed on planet. Armed intruders
in section 8A. Defence stations, defence stations!"

The two mice sniffed irritably round the fragments of their glass
transports where they lay shattered on the floor.

"Damnation," muttered Frankie mouse, "all that fuss over two
pounds of Earthling brain." He scuttled round and about, his
pink eyes flashing, his fine white coat bristling with static.

"The only thing we can do now," said Benji, crouching and
stroking his whiskers in thought, "is to try and fake a question,
invent one that will sound plausible." "Difficult," said Frankie. He
thought. "How about What's yellow and dangerous?"

Benji considered this for a moment.

"No, no good," he said. "Doesn't fit the answer."

They sank into silence for a few seconds.

"Alright," said Benji. "What do you get if you multiply six by
seven?"

"No, no, too literal, too factual," said Frankie, "wouldn't sustain
the punters' interest."

Again they thought.

Then Frankie said: "Here's a thought. How many roads must a
man walk down?"

"Ah," said Benji. "Aha, now that does sound promising!" He
rolled the phrase around a little. "Yes," he said, "that's excellent!
Sounds very significant without actually tying you down to
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          213

meaning anything at all. How many roads must a man walk
down? Forty-two. Excellent, excellent, that'll fox 'em. Frankie
baby, we are made!"

They performed a scampering dance in their excitement.

Near them on the floor lay several rather ugly men who had
been hit about the head with some heavy design awards.

Half a mile away, four figures pounded up a corridor looking for
a way out. They emerged into a wide open-plan computer bay.
They glanced about wildly.

"Which way do you reckon Zaphod?" said Ford.

"At a wild guess, I'd say down here," said Zaphod, running off
down to the right between a computer bank and the wall. As the
others started after him he was brought up short by a Kill-O-Zap
energy bolt that cracked through the air inches in front of him
and fried a small section of adjacent wall.

A voice on a loud hailer said, "OK Beeblebrox, hold it right there.
We've got you covered."

"Cops!" hissed Zaphod, and span around in a crouch. "You want
to try a guess at all, Ford?"

"OK, this way," said Ford, and the four of them ran down a
gangway between two computer banks.

At the end of the gangway appeared a heavily armoured and
space- suited figure waving a vicious Kill-O-Zap gun.
                       214 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"We don't want to shoot you, Beeblebrox!" shouted the figure.
"Suits me fine!" shouted Zaphod back and dived down a wide gap
between two data process units.

The others swerved in behind him.

"There are two of them," said Trillian. "We're cornered."

They squeezed themselves down in an angle between a large
computer data bank and the wall.

They held their breath and waited.

Suddenly the air exploded with energy bolts as both the cops
opened fire on them simultaneously.

"Hey, they're shooting at us," said Arthur, crouching in a tight
ball, "I thought they said they didn't want to do that."

"Yeah, I thought they said that," agreed Ford.

Zaphod stuck a head up for a dangerous moment.

"Hey," he said, "I thought you said you didn't want to shoot us!"
and ducked again.

They waited.

After a moment a voice replied, "It isn't easy being a cop!"

"What did he say?" whispered Ford in astonishment.

"He said it isn't easy being a cop."

"Well surely that's his problem isn't it?"

"I'd have thought so."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           215

Ford shouted out, "Hey listen! I think we've got enough
problems on our own having you shooting at us, so if you could
avoid laying your problems on us as well, I think we'd all find it
easier to cope!"

Another pause, and then the loud hailer again.

"Now see here, guy," said the voice on the loud hailer, "you're not
dealing with any dumb two-bit trigger-pumping morons with low
hairlines, little piggy eyes and no conversation, we're a couple of
intelligent caring guys that you'd probably quite like if you met
us socially! I don't go around gratuitously shooting people and
then bragging about it afterwards in seedy space-rangers bars,
like some cops I could mention! I go around shooting people
gratuitously and then I agonize about it afterwards for hours to
my girlfriend!"

"And I write novels!" chimed in the other cop. "Though I haven't
had any of them published yet, so I better warn you, I'm in a
meeeean mood!"

Ford's eyes popped halfway out of their sockets. "Who are these
guys?" he said.

"Dunno," said Zaphod, "I think I preferred it when they were
shooting."

"So are you going to come quietly," shouted one of the cops
again, "or are you going to let us blast you out?"

"Which would you prefer?" shouted Ford.

A millisecond later the air about them started to fry again, as bolt
after bolt of Kill-O-Zap hurled itself into the computer bank in
front of them.
                      216 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

The fusillade continued for several seconds at unbearable
intensity.

When it stopped, there were a few seconds of near quietness ad
the echoes died away.

"You still there?" called one of the cops.

"Yes," they called back.

"We didn't enjoy doing that at all," shouted the other cop.

"We could tell," shouted Ford.

"Now, listen to this, Beeblebrox, and you better listen good!"

"Why?" shouted Back Zaphod.

"Because," shouted the cop, "it's going to be very intelligent, and
quite interesting and humane! Now either you all give yourselves
up now and let us beat you up a bit, though not very much of
course because we are firmly opposed to needless violence, or we
blow up this entire planet and possibly one or two others we
noticed on our way out here!"

"But that's crazy!" cried Trillian. "You wouldn't do that!"

"Oh yes we would," shouted the cop, "wouldn't we?" he asked the
other one.

"Oh yes, we'd have to, no question," the other one called back.

"But why?" demanded Trillian.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /             217

"Because there are some things you have to do even if you are an
enlightened liberal cop who knows all about sensitivity and
everything!"

"I just don't believe these guys," muttered Ford, shaking his head.

One cop shouted to the other, "Shall we shoot them again for a
bit?"

"Yeah, why not?" They let fly another electric barrage.

The heat and noise was quite fantastic. Slowly, the computer
bank was beginning to disintegrate. The front had almost all
melted away, and thick rivulets of molten metal were winding
their way back towards where they were squatting. They
huddled further back and waited for the end.
                         218 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

But the end never came, at least not then.

Quite suddenly the barrage stopped, and the sudden silence
afterwards was punctuated by a couple of strangled gurgles and
thuds.

The four stared at each other.

"What happened?" said Arthur.

"They stopped," said Zaphod with a shrug.

"Why?"

"Dunno, do you want to go and ask them?"

"No."

They waited.

"Hello?" called out Ford.

No answer.

"That's odd."

"Perhaps it's a trap."

"They haven't the wit."

"What were those thuds?"

"Dunno."

They waited for a few more seconds.

"Right," said Ford, "I'm going to have a look."
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           219

He glanced round at the others.

"Is no one going to say, No you can't possibly, let me go instead?"

They all shook their heads.

"Oh well," he said, and stood up.        For a moment, nothing
happened.

Then, after a second or so, nothing continued to happen. Ford
peered through the thick smoke that was billowing out of the
burning computer.

Cautiously he stepped out into the open.

Still nothing happened.

Twenty yards away he could dimly see through the smoke the
space-suited figure of one of the cops. He was lying in a
crumpled heap on the ground. Twenty yards in the other
direction lay the second man. No one else was anywhere to be
seen.

This struck Ford as being extremely odd.

Slowly, nervously, he walked towards the first one. The body lay
reassuringly still as he approached it, and continued to lie
reassuringly still as he reached it and put his foot down on the
Kill-O-Zap gun that still dangled from its limp fingers.

He reached down and picked it up, meeting no resistance.

The cop was quite clearly dead.
                    220 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

A quick examination revealed him to be from Blagulon Kappa -
he was a methane-breathing life form, dependent on his space
suit for survival in the thin oxygen atmosphere of Magrathea.

The tiny life-support system computer on his backpack appeared
unexpectedly to have blown up.

Ford poked around in it in considerable astonishment. These
miniature suit computers usually had the full back-up of the
main computer back on the ship, with which they were directly
linked through the sub-etha. Such a system was fail-safe in all
circumstances other than total feedback malfunction, which was
unheard of.

He hurried over to the other prone figure, and discovered that
exactly the same impossible thing had happened to him,
presumably simultaneously.

He called the others over to look.     They came, shared his
astonishment, but not his curiosity.

"Let's get shot out of this hole," said Zaphod. "If whatever I'm
supposed to be looking for is here, I don't want it." He grabbed
the second Kill-O-Zap gun, blasted a perfectly harmless
accounting computer and rushed out into the corridor, followed
by the others. He very nearly blasted hell out of an aircar that
stood waiting for them a few yards away.

The aircar was empty, but Arthur recognized it as belonging to
Slartibartfast.

It had a note from him pinned to part of its sparse instrument
panel. The note had an arrow drawn on it, pointing at one of
the controls.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /         221

It said, This is probably the best button to press.
                       222 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

The aircar rocketed them at speeds in excess of R17 through the
steel tunnels that lead out onto the appalling surface of the
planet which was now in the grip of yet another drear morning
twilight. Ghastly grey lights congealed on the land.

R is a velocity measure, defined as a reasonable speed of travel
that is consistent with health, mental wellbeing and not being
more than say five minutes late. It is therefore clearly an almost
infinitely variable figure according to circumstances, since the
first two factors vary not only with speed taken as an absolute,
but also with awareness of the third factor. Unless handled with
tranquility this equation can result in considerable stress, ulcers
and even death.

R17 is not a fixed velocity, but it is clearly far too fast.

The aircar flung itself through the air at R17 and above,
deposited them next to the Heart of Gold which stood starkly on
the frozen ground like a bleached bone, and then precipitately
hurled itself back in the direction whence they had come,
presumably on important business of its own.

Shivering, the four of them stood and looked at the ship.

Beside it stood another one.

It was the Blagulon Kappa policecraft, a bulbous sharklike affair,
slate green in colour and smothered with black stencilled letters
of varying degrees of size and unfriendliness. The letters
informed anyone who cared to read them as to where the ship
was from, what section of the police it was assigned to, and where
the power feeds should be connected.

It seemed somehow unnaturally dark and silent, even for a ship
whose two-man crew was at that moment lying asphyxicated in a
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /           223

smoke-filled chamber several miles beneath the ground. It is one
of those curious things that is impossible to explain or define, but
one can sense when a ship is completely dead.

Ford could sense it and found it most mysterious - a ship and two
policemen seemed to have gone spontaneously dead. In his
experience the Universe simply didn't work like that.

The other three could sense it too, but they could sense the bitter
cold even more and hurried back into the Heart of Gold
suffering from an acute attack of no curiosity.

Ford stayed, and went to examine the Blagulon ship. As he
walked, he nearly tripped over an inert steel figure lying face
down in the cold dust.

"Marvin!" he exclaimed. "What are you doing?" "Don't feel you
have to take any notice of me, please," came a muffled drone.

"But how are you, metalman?" said Ford.

"Very depressed."

"What's up?"

"I don't know," said Marvin, "I've never been there."

"Why," said Ford squatting down beside him and shivering, "are
you lying face down in the dust?"

"It's a very effective way of being wretched," said Marvin. "Don't
pretend you want to talk to me, I know you hate me."

"No I don't."
                      224 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

"Yes you do, everybody does. It's part of the shape of the
Universe. I only have to talk to somebody and they begin to hate
me. Even robots hate me. If you just ignore me I expect I shall
probably go away."

He jacked himself up to his feet and stood resolutely facing the
opposite direction.

"That ship hated me," he said dejectedly, indicating the
policecraft.

"That ship?" said Ford in sudden excitement. "What happened
to it? Do you know?"

"It hated me because I talked to it."

"You talked to it?" exclaimed Ford. "What do you mean you
talked to it?"

"Simple. I got very bored and depressed, so I went and plugged
myself in to its external computer feed. I talked to the computer
at great length and explained my view of the Universe to it," said
Marvin.

"And what happened?" pressed Ford.

"It committed suicide," said Marvin and stalked off back to the
Heart of Gold.
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /              225

That night, as the Heart of Gold was busy putting a few light
years between itself and the Horsehead Nebula, Zaphod lounged
under the small palm tree on the bridge trying to bang his brain
into shape with massive Pan Galactic Gargle Blasters; Ford and
Trillian sat in a corner discussing life and matters arising from it;
and Arthur took to his bed to flip through Ford's copy of The
Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy. Since he was going to live in
the place, he reasoned, he'd better start finding out something
about it.

He came across this entry.

It said: 'The History of every major Galactic Civilization tends to
pass through three distinct and recognizable phases, those of
Survival, Inquiry and Sophistication, otherwise known as the
How, Why and Where phases.

"For instance, the first phase is characterized by the question
How can we eat? the second by the question Why do we eat? and
the third by the question Where shall we have lunch?"

He got no further before the ship's intercom buzzed into life.

"Hey Earthman? You hungry kid?" said Zaphod's voice.

"Er, well yes, a little peckish I suppose," said Arthur.

"OK baby, hold tight," said Zaphod. "We'll take in a quick bite at
the Restaurant at the End of the Universe."
                      226 / DOUGLAS ADAMS

{What's President?}

President: full   title   President   of   the   Imperial   Galactic
Government.

The term Imperial is kept though it is now an anachronism. The
hereditary Emperor is nearly dead and has been so for many
centuries. In the last moments of his dying coma he was locked
in a statis field which keeps him in a state of perpetual
unchangingness. All his heirs are now long dead, and this means
that without any drastic political upheaval, power has simply and
effectively moved a rung or two down the ladder, and is now
seen to be vested in a body which used to act simply as advisers to
the Emperor - an elected Governmental assembly headed by a
President elected by that assembly. In fact it vests in no such
place.

The President in particular is very much a figurehead - he wields
no real power whatsoever. He is apparently chosen by the
government, but the qualities he is required to display are not
those of leadership but those of finely judged outrage. For this
reason the President is always a controversial choice, always an
infuriating but fascinating character. His job is not to wield
power but to draw attention away from it. On those criteria
Zaphod Beeblebrox is one of the most successful Presidents the
Galaxy has ever had - he has already spent two of his ten
Presidential years in prison for fraud. Very very few people
realize that the President and the Government have virtually no
power at all, and of these very few people only six know whence
ultimate political power is wielded. Most of the others secretly
believe that the ultimate decision-making process is handled by a
computer. They couldn't be more wrong.

{About Ford Perfect}
       THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY /          227

Ford Prefect's original name is only pronuncible in an obscure
Betelgeusian dialect, now virtually extinct since the Great
Collapsing Hrung Disaster of Gal./Sid./Year 03758 which wiped
out all the old Praxibetel communities on Betelgeuse Seven.
Ford's father was the only man on the entire planet to survive the
Great Collapsing Hrung disaster, by an extraordinary
coincidence that he was never able satisfactorily to explain. The
whole episode is shrouded in deep mystery: in fact no one ever
knew what a Hrung was nor why it had chosen to collapse on
Betelgeuse Seven particularly. Ford's father, magnanimously
waving aside the clouds of suspicion that had inevitably settled
around him, came to live on Betelgeuse Five where he both
fathered and uncled Ford; in memory of his now dead race he
christened him in the ancient Praxibetel tongue.

Because Ford never learned to say his original name, his father
eventually died of shame, which is still a terminal disease in some
parts of the Galaxy. The other kids at school nicknamed him Ix,
which in the language of Betelgeuse Five translates as "boy who is
not able satisfactorily to explain what a Hrung is, nor why it
should choose to collapse on Betelgeuse Seven".

